

©2026 - C3
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Participants will be assessed on their understanding of the anatomy and physiology for 
the nervous, special senses, and endocrine systems of the human body.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class II
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS: 
a.	 Each team may bring writing utensils.
b.	 Each team may bring two Class II calculators.
c.	 Each team may bring one (1) 8.5” x 11” sheet of paper that may contain information on both sides in any 
form and from any source. The sheet of paper may be laminated or placed in a sheet protector to increase 
durability. Affixed labels, as well as multiple sheets of paper (whether in a single sheet protector or not) 
are prohibited.
3.	 THE COMPETITION: This Event may be administered as a written test or as a series of lab-practical 
stations which can include but are not limited to experiments, scientific apparatus, models, illustrations, 
specimens, data collection and analysis, and problems for students to solve. Content topics will include:
a.	 Nervous System: All levels should understand:
i.	
Cellular Anatomy & Physiology
(1)	Neurons: Understand the cellular anatomy and physiology of neurons, identify and understand 
synapses and neurotransmitters
(2)	Glial Cells: Compare the types of glial cells and their respective functions
(3)	Electrophysiology: qualitatively understand action potential generation and propagation in 
myelinated and unmyelinated neurons, and qualitatively & quantitatively understand models 
for the ionic basis of the cellular membrane potential (i.e. Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz voltage 
equation)
ii.	 Central Nervous System (CNS)
(1)	The Brain: Understand the detailed structure and function of the cerebrum and its role in 
cognition, sensation, movement, memory, and language. Understand a general overview of 
structure and function of the cerebellum and brainstem
(2)	Spinal Cord: Understand a general overview of organization of the spinal cord and nerve roots.
iii.	 Identification of simple encephalographic waveforms 
iv.	 Peripheral Nervous System – neural ganglia, action and physiology of sensory and motor neurons, 
organization of sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons, understand differences in and purposes 
of parasympathetic, sympathetic, somatic, and sensory systems, reflex arc physiology
v.	
Disorders: Epilepsy, Alzheimer’s Disease, Multiple Sclerosis, Parkinson’s Disease, Cerebral Palsy, 
Stroke, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS)  
vi.	 Effects of the drugs: alcohol, caffeine, nicotine, and marijuana on the nervous system
vii.	 Effect of toxins on neuron function and signaling (limited to tetrodotoxin, curare, botulinum toxin, 
anatoxin-a, and tetanus toxin)
State & National Level Only:
viii.	The Brain: Understand the detailed structure and function of the brainstem and cerebellum, including 
specific nuclei clusters and tracts.
ix.	 Cranial Nerves: Understand cranial nerve pathways, classification, and clinical assessments of their 
functions.
x.	 Spinal Cord: Understand the detailed structure and function of the spinal cord, including specific 
ascending and descending tracts and their respective roles in sensation and motor function
xi.	 General Senses: Understand the mechanisms for the general senses of touch, pressure, pain, 
temperature, itch, and proprioception and their relation to spinal cord tracts and the peripheral 
nervous system.
National Level Only: 
xii.	 Electrophysiology: Understand the cable theory model of the neuron and modeling the neuron as 
a basic RC circuit, Quantitative models of the action potential (e.g. Hodgkin-Huxley model) and 
spiking neuron models
ANATOMY & PHYSIOLOGY C

©2026 - C4
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
xiii.	The Brain: Understand the detailed structure and function of the cerebral vasculature, including the 
internal carotid arteries, vertebral arteries, basilar artery, Circle of Willis, anterior cerebral artery 
(ACA), middle cerebral artery (MCA), posterior cerebral artery (PCA), superior cerebellar artery 
(SCA), anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA), and posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA). 
xiv.	Treatments and prevention for all conditions listed above (risk factors, medications, surgical 
treatment, etc.)
b.	 Special Senses: All levels should understand
i.	
Anatomy and Physiology of Sight
(1)	Identify and describe the major parts of the eye: cornea, lens, iris, pupil, retina, optic nerve, 
and their functions.
(2)	Explain how light enters the eye and is focused on the retina, and the role of rods and cones in 
detecting light and color.
ii.	 Anatomy and Physiology of Hearing and Balance
(1)	Identify the major parts of the ear: outer ear (pinna, ear canal), middle ear  (eardrum, ossicles), 
inner ear (cochlea, semicircular canals) and their functions.
(2)	Describe how hair cells and the cochlea detect sound frequency and amplitude
(3)	Describe the semicircular canals and vestibular system in the inner ear and how they contribute 
to balance and spatial orientation.
iii.	 Anatomy and Physiology of Smell
(1)	Identify the major structures involved in smell: the nasal cavity, olfactory epithelium, olfactory 
receptor cells, and olfactory bulb.
(2)	Describe how odor molecules bind to olfactory receptors in the nasal cavity, initiating the 
sense of smell.
iv.	 Anatomy and Physiology of Taste
(1)	Identify the major structures involved in taste: tongue, taste buds, papillae, taste receptor cells, 
and gustatory nerves.
v.	
Disorders: myopia, hyperopia, presbyopia, nyctalopia, astigmatism, conjunctivitis, color blindness, 
otitis externa, otitis media, types of deafness, anosmia/dysosmia, dysgeusia  
State & National Level Only:
vi.	 Anatomy and Physiology of Sight
(1)	Explain the pathway of visual signal transmission from the retina through the optic nerve, 
optic chiasm, and optic tracts to the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) and visual cortex. 
(2)	Describe how the visual fields are processed in each hemisphere of the brain and how damage 
at different points along this pathway (e.g., optic nerve, optic chiasm, optic tract) can lead to 
specific visual field defects like monocular blindness, bitemporal hemianopia, or homonymous 
hemianopia.
National Level Only:
vii.	 Anatomy and Physiology of Sight
(1)	Describe the neural pathway involved in pupillary control, including the role of the pretectal 
nucleus, Edinger-Westphal nucleus, and oculomotor nerve in the pupillary light reflex. 
(2)	Explain how light entering the eye triggers constriction of the pupil (miosis) through the 
parasympathetic system, and how dilation (mydriasis) occurs via the sympathetic pathway.
viii.	Diabetic Retinopathy, Macular Degeneration, Glaucoma, Otosclerosis, Presbycusis, Meniere’s 
Disease
ix.	 Treatments and prevention for all conditions listed above (risk factors, medications, surgical 
treatment, etc.)
c.	 Endocrine System: all levels should understand
i.	
Identify and compare and contrast three classes of hormones – steroids, peptides, and amines 
ii.	 Understand the mechanisms of hormone action – nuclear vs. cytoplasmic  
iii.	 Endocrine related problems – hypersecretion, hyposecretion, hypersensitivity, hyposensitivity 
iv.	 Identify, compare and contrast hormones and their respective functions secreted by the hypothalamus, 
pituitary gland, pineal gland, thyroid, parathyroid, thymus, adrenal glands, pancreas, and gonads
v.	
Disorders: diabetes mellitus, central diabetes insipidus, hypoglycemia, hyperparathyroidism, 
hypoparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism (including Graves’ disease), hypothyroidism (including 
Hashimoto’s disease), goiter, congenital iodine deficiency syndrome, primary hyperaldosteronism, 
polycystic ovary syndrome
ANATOMY & PHYSIOLOGY C (CONT.)

©2026 - C5
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
State & National Level Only:
vi.	 Identify hormones and their respective function secreted by additional organs (limited to the liver, 
kidneys, heart and adipose tissue)
vii.	 Understand the exposure routes and effects of endocrine disruptors (limited to DDT, BPA, and 
PFAS)
viii.	Additional Disorders: Cushing’s Syndrome, Addison’s Disease, Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors 
ix.	 Endocrine cycles and negative feedback, Autonomic nervous system control of endocrine function  
National Level Only
x.	 Explain the endocrine system's role in the stress response
xi.	 Additional Disorders: Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia, Myxedema, acromegaly, and pituitary 
dwarfism
xii.	 Treatments and prevention for all conditions listed above (risk factors, medications, surgical 
treatment, etc.)
4.	 SCORING:
a.	 High score wins.
b.	 Selected questions will be used to break ties.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
ANATOMY & PHYSIOLOGY C (CONT.)

©2026 - C6
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
ASTRONOMY C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Teams will demonstrate an understanding of stellar evolution: From formation to 
destruction.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes 
	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class IV
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Each team may bring one of the following options containing information in any form from any source: 
a computer/tablet and a three-ring binder, two computers/tablets of any kind, or two three-ring binders.
b.	 If three ring binders are used, they may be of any size and the information contained should be attached 
using the available rings. The information or pages may be removed during the event. Sheet protectors 
and laminated sheets are allowed.
c.	 Each team may bring two stand-alone Class IV calculators. If the participants are using a computer 
or tablet, they may use the calculator app or other program on their device in place of a stand-alone 
calculator.
d.	 Participants using computers/tablets as a resource should have all information stored so that it is available 
to them offline. Unauthorized generative AI tools (e.g., ChatGPT, DALL-E) are not allowed to be used to 
generate answers under any circumstances during the event. Teams may be asked to access a dedicated 
NASA image analysis website to answer some JS9 questions. If so, supervisors will provide an alternative 
(e.g., event supervisor-supplied computer) for teams that did not bring a laptop/tablet.
3.	 THE COMPETITION: Using information which may include Hertzsprung-Russell diagrams, spectra, light 
curves, motions, cosmological distance equations and relationships, stellar magnitudes and classification, 
multi-wavelength images (gamma-ray, X-ray, UV, optical, IR, radio), charts, graphs and JS9 imaging 
analysis tools, teams will compete in activities and answer questions related to:
a.	 Stellar evolution including stellar classification, spectral features and chemical composition, luminosity, 
blackbody radiation, spectroscopy, H-R diagram transitions, cold molecular clouds & star formation 
regions, protostars, T Tauri Variables, red giants, Mira variables, RR Lyrae variables, Cepheid variables, 
white dwarfs, planetary nebulas, neutron stars, pulsars, X-Ray binaries, and Type Ia and II supernovas.
b.	 Use orbital mechanics, Kepler’s laws, rotation and circular motion to answer questions relating to 
the orbital motions of binary and multiple star systems; use parallax, spectroscopic parallax, period-
luminosity relations, and the distance modulus to calculate distances to RR Lyrae, Cepheids and Type 
Ia supernovas, and the Stefan-Boltzmann law to answer questions relating to the content areas outlined 
above. 
c.	 Identify and answer questions relating to the content areas outlined above for the following objects: The 
Orion Molecular Cloud Complex, Sharpless 29 (NGC 6559), Ophion Star Family, HP Tau, Mira (Omicron 
Ceti), Helix Nebula (NGC 7293) Janus (ZTF J203349.8+322901.1), WDJ181058.67+311940.94, The 
Crab (M1), The Bone (G359.13), Cas A, Tycho’s SNR
4.	 SCORING: All questions will have been assigned a predetermined number of points. The highest score 
wins. Selected questions will be used to break ties.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
This event is supported by NASA's Universe of Learning Astrophysics STEM Learning and Literacy 
Network 

©2026 - C7
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Teams will design and build a cantilevered beam or truss structure that extends from 
a vertical Testing Wall and supports a load at a specified distance from the Testing Wall. The structure 
must meet the requirements specified in these rules to achieve the highest score, which is a combination of 
structural efficiency and Load Scored Bonus.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 10 minutes
EYE PROTECTION: B
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Only one Structure designed and built by the team may be entered, built prior to competition.
b.	 Eye Protection B protective eyewear must be worn during competition (required ANSI marking: Z87+). 
c.	 Design Knowledge: Participants must be able to answer questions on design, construction & operation.
d.	 Test Apparatus will be supplied by the Event Supervisor. Participants may not measure or adjust Test 
Apparatus or bring any equipment, tools or instruments.
3.	 CONSTRUCTION PARAMETERS:
a.	 Single Structure: no separate, loose or detachable parts or pieces.
b.	 The structure is constructed of wood, bonded by adhesive (7.a. – 7.d.). No other materials permitted.
c.	 Structure attaches to the testing wall by resting on the Mounting Bolt Assembly (6.b.v.).
d.	 Structure supports only the Loading Block of the Loading Assembly (6.c.i.) which supports the balance 
of the Loading Assembly. 
e.	 Structure supports the Loading Assembly (6.c.) with the centerline of the chain being:
i.	
at least 40 cm but no more than 45 cm when measured horizontally from the Testing Wall (6.b.). 
ii.	 no more than 2.5 cm horizontally from either side of a perpendicular line extending from the 
centerline of the Testing Wall.
15.04
2.00
Mounting Bolt assembly in Testing Wall (6.c)
Loading Assembly Chain centerline within 
defined area (3.e)
40 cm
5 cm
1.97
1.00
2.5 cm
5 cm
Center Line of Testing Wall
Figure 1: Top view of Test Wall (not to scale)
f.	 During the Competition testing, the Boomilever may ONLY touch the Testing Wall OUTSIDE the 
Vertical Contact Width Lines.
g.	 Base vs. Load Scored Bonus Options:
i.	
Base Option: 
(1)	During the Competition testing, the Boomilever may ONLY touch the Testing Wall 
BETWEEN the 10 cm and 15 cm Horizontal Contact Depth Lines (6.b.) and
(2)	Prior to loading sand, the bottom of the Loading Block must be supported ABOVE the 
horizontal plane extending from the 15 cm Horizontal Contact Depth Line (6.b.).    
ii.	 - OR - Load Scored BONUS option scored if the following requirements are met in place of 3.g.i.: 
(1)	During the Competition testing, the Boomilever may ONLY touch the Testing Wall ABOVE 
the 10 cm Horizontal Contact Depth Line (6.b.) and
(2)	Prior to loading sand, the bottom of the Loading Block must be supported ABOVE the 
horizontal plane extending from the 10 cm Horizontal Contact Depth Line (6.b.) and
(3)	The structure must hold 15 kg.
4.	 COMPETITION:
a.	 Prior to competition, the Event Supervisor will:
i.	
Verify all Test Apparatus are available and properly set-up per section 6.
ii.	 Verify the mass of the Loading Assembly meets requirements of 6.c.v.
iii.	 Verify that the combined mass of the Loading Assembly (6.c.) and sand (6.d.) is at least 15,100 g. 
BOOMILEVER C

©2026 - C8
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
BOOMILEVER C (CONT.)
but no more than 15,200 g.
b.	 Check-in:
i.	
Once participants begin check-in they may NOT leave or gain any outside assistance, materials or 
communications (including cell phone communication) until Testing is completed.
ii.	 No alterations may be made once check-in begins.
iii.	 Event Supervisor or Assistant will begin check-in:
(1)	Verify participants have proper Eye Protection (2.b.).
(2)	Inspect Structure design and construction materials (3.a., 3.b.).
(3)	Teams will submit their Estimated Load Supported (4.c.vi.) to be used as a Tiebreaker (5.e.).
(4)	Participants place structure on the Structure Scale (6.f.) so the Event Supervisor or Assistant 
can determine the structure mass to the nearest 0.01 gram or best precision available. 
c.	 Testing:
i.	
Teams will have 6 minutes to set up and test their Structure on the Testing Wall with the Loading 
Assembly. If necessary, participants may disassemble the Loading Assembly but must reassemble 
in the same order as presented by the Event Supervisor (6.c.). The bucket must be mounted to allow 
enough clearance above the floor for the bucket to tilt or the Structure to deflect.
ii.	 The Event Supervisor will check before loading with sand begins:
(1)	Conformity to the requirements 3.c., 3.d., 3.e., and 3.f.
(2)	Conformity to requirements 3.g.i. or 3g.ii. to determine if the structure meets construction 
requirements for Load Scored Bonus.
(3)	The bucket is suspended to have clearance above the floor for testing. 
iii.	 Structure may not be adjusted once loading of sand has begun.
iv.	 Participants will load sand. Bucket may only be stabilized from movement by the tips of Bucket 
Stabilizing Sticks (6.e.).
v.	
Loading Stops immediately when the Structure fails, the load is supported by anything other than 
the Structure, or time expires. At the Supervisors discretion, sand may be removed from the bucket 
if pouring continued after the Structure fails or time expires.
vi.	 Load Supported is determined and recorded to the nearest gram.  Load Supported is the combined 
mass of the Loading Assembly (6.c.) and Sand (6.d.) in the Bucket, with any parts of the Structure 
in the Bucket removed prior to measurement. 
vii.	 The Minimum Load Supported is the mass of the Loading Assembly (6.c.). If a Structure cannot 
hold the Loading Assembly (6.c.), the Structure is placed in Tier 3, unable to be loaded.
viii.	The Maximum Load Supported is 15,000 g.
ix.	 Test Data Review. The Event Supervisor will review with the team the data recorded on their 
scoresheet. Once data is acknowledged by the team, the Testing is complete.
x.	 Teams who wish to file an appeal must leave their Structure with the Event Supervisor.
5.	 SCORING:
a.	 High Score Wins. Score = Load Scored (5.c.)/ Structure Mass (4.b.iii.4.).
b.	 Load Scored Bonus: meeting the Load Scored BONUS construction parameters (3.f.ii.).  Bonus = 5,000 
g.
c.	 Load Scored = Load Supported (4.c.vi.) + Load Scored Bonus (5.b.).
d.	 Structures will be placed in one of 3 tiers.
i.	
Tier 1: meeting all construction and competition requirements.
ii.	 Tier 2: NOT meeting any one or more of the construction, competition requirements.
iii.	 Tier 3: Unable to be loaded, not supporting the minimum load (4.c.vii.), or no eye protection. Ranked 
by the mass of the structure from lowest structure mass to heaviest. 
e.	 Tiebreakers
i.	
Estimated Load Supported: closest to actual load supported.
ii.	 Lowest Structure mass.
6.	 TEST APPARATUS:
a.	 In-Person tournaments: The Event Supervisor will provide all Test Apparatus. At the Event Supervisor’s 
discretion, more than one Test Apparatus may be used.
b.	 The Testing Wall 
i.	
Solid and rigid surface at least 40.0 cm wide x 30.0 cm high. Constructed of ¾” grade plywood or 
other suitable material, with a smooth, hard, low friction surface that does not bend when loaded. 
The Testing Wall must be adjusted to be plumb vertical by the Event Supervisor utilizing a 9” 

©2026 - C9
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
BOOMILEVER C (CONT.)
torpedo level or similar method. 
ii.	 One Mounting Bolt hole no larger than 0.266-inch diameter must be drilled through the wall located 
approximately 5.0 cm below the top of the Testing Wall and halfway between the sides of the wall. 
The horizontal and vertical centerlines of the Mounting Bolt hole must be marked on the face of the 
Testing Wall.
iii.	 Horizontal Contact Depth Lines must be clearly visible on the Testing Wall. They must be drawn at 
10 cm, 15 cm, and 20 cm and below the center of the Mounting Bolt hole.
iv.	 Two vertical Contact Width Lines must be clearly visible on the Testing Wall. They will be drawn 
4.0 cm to the right and left side of the center of the Mounting Bolt hole.
5.0
40.0
20.0
10.0
15.0
Mounting Bolt 
Assembly  
4.0
30.0
10 cm Horizontal 
Contact Depth (CD) Line
15 cm Horizontal 
Contact Depth (CD) Line
Vertical Contact 
Width (CW) Lines
20 cm Horizontal 
Contact Depth (CD) Line
20.0
4.0
Figure 2 – Testing Wall (not to scale, dimensions in cm)
v.	
The Mounting Bolt Assembly 
(1)	The Mounting Bolt Assembly will consist of:
(a)	Connector Bolt, ¼ -20 x 2.36 inches (60 mm) long, with a 0.66-inch (17 mm) diameter head 
and 0.78 inch (20 mm) unthreaded section, 1 required. (Figure 3)
0.0 in.
0.6 in.
1.0 in.
2.0 in.
0.78
2.36
2.36 inch (60 mm)
Bolt Length
~ 0.78 inch 
(20 mm)
Unthreaded
 Length
0.66
~ 0.66 inch 
(17 mm)
Diameter
Figure 3 - Connector Bolt, ¼ -20 x 2.36 inches (60 mm) long
(b)	Hex Nut, American National Standard, 1/4 – 20, 0.23-inch-thick maximum, 2 required.
(c)	Flat Washer, USS ¼ inch, approx. 3/4 inch outside diameter x 0.09-inch-thick maximum, 2 
required.
(2)	 The Mounting Bolt Assembly will be secured in place on the Testing Wall by the Event 
Supervisor as follows: 
(a)	The Connector Bolt will have a hex nut and flat washer on the front side of the Testing Wall 
and a hex nut and flat washer on the back side of the Testing Wall. 
(b)	Connector Bolt is installed to allow 3.0 cm +/- 0.1 cm (1.18 inch +/- 0.03 inch) clearance 
between the closest face of the Connector Bolt to the Testing Wall and the Testing Wall face 

©2026 - C10
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
BOOMILEVER C (CONT.)
(Figure 4).  
(c)	The nuts must be tightened firmly to hold the bolt in place during the competition.
(d)	Teams may not adjust or disassemble the Mounting Bolt Assembly.
1.18
Connector Bolt
 Hex Nut
2 required
 
Flat Washer  
 2 required
Testing 
Wall
0.0 in.
0.6 in.
1.0 in.
2.0 in.
3.0 cm +/- 0.1
(1.18 inch +/- 0.03)
Figure 4 – Mounting Bolt Assembly in Testing Wall
c.	 The Loading Assembly will consist of: 
i.	
A square Loading Block measuring 5 cm x 5 cm x approximately 2 cm high with a hole no larger 
than 0.266-inch diameter drilled in the center of the 5 cm x 5 cm faces for a ¼” threaded eyebolt. 
ii.	 A ¼ inch threaded eyebolt (1-inch nominal eye outside diameter) with an overall length no longer 
than 3 inches and a ¼ inch wing nut. The Loading Block must be mounted on the eye bolt and be 
trapped between the “eye” of the eye bolt and the wing nut. 
Loading Block
Eyebolt Length 
Wing Nut
Eyebolt
Figure 5 – Loading Block with eyebolt and wing nut (not to scale)
iii.	 A chain and S-hook that are suspended from the eyebolt on the Loading Block. 
iv.	 A five-gallon plastic bucket with handle and hook to be suspended from the chain. 
v.	
The total combined mass of the Loading Assembly may not exceed 1,500 g. 

©2026 - C11
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
Wing Nut
Loading Block
Eyebolt
S-hook attached to 
chain
Chain
S-hook attached to 
Bucket handle
Bucket, 5 gallon
Figure 6 – Loading Assembly (not to scale)
d.	 Sand: Load will be applied using sand.
e.	 Two (2) Bucket Stabilizing Sticks each made from a piece of ½” dowel approximately 18 inches long 
with a spring-type doorstop screwed into one end. 
½” dowel approximately 18 inches long 
 spring-type door stop screwed into one end. 
Figure 7 – Stabilizing Stick (not to scale)
f.	 Structure scale: Must be a digital scale. The scale is recommended to have a minimum range of 0 to 100 
grams with a recommended resolution of 0.01 gram and minimum resolution of 0.1 grams.
g.	 Sand scale and load verification: Must be a digital scale. The scale is recommended to have a range of 
0 to 25,000 grams and a minimum range of 0 to 16,000 grams. The scale is recommended to have a 
resolution of 1 gram and a minimum resolution of 10 grams.
7.	 DEFINITIONS:
a.	 Wood is defined as the hard, fibrous substance making up the greater part of the stems, branches, trunks, 
and roots of trees beneath the bark. Wood does NOT include bark, particleboard, wood composites, 
bamboo or grasses, paper, commercially laminated wood (i.e., plywood), or pieces formed of sawdust, 
wood shavings, and adhesive. Wood may never be painted, soaked, or coated in glue, chemically 
modified, color enhanced, or have tape/preprinted/paper labels affixed. Ink barcodes or markings from 
the construction process may be left on the wood. 
b.	 Wood Size: There are no limits on the cross-sectional sizes of individual pieces of wood. 
c.	 Lamination: multiple layers of wood may be glued together by the team without restriction. Commercially 
laminated wood is not allowed.
d.	 Adhesive is a substance used to join two or more materials together and may be used only for this 
purpose. Any commercially available adhesive may be used (e.g., glue, cement, cyanoacrylate, epoxy, 
hot melt, polyurethane, and super glue). Adhesive tapes are not allowed. 
e.	 Connector Bolt can be found at several stores including Ace Hardware, Fleet Farm, Home Depot, Lowes, 
Menards, and Amazon. The bolt is sold under the following brand names: Hillman, Everbilt, and Midwest 
Fastener. The Connector bolt is typically in the specialty fasteners section in a drawer labeled “Furniture 
Parts”. The Bolt comes in at least 4 finishes: Black, Brass, Bronze and Nickel. The black finish being 
preferred, but any of the listed finishes may be used.
f.	 Sand is defined as a clean, dry, free-flowing material of a similar density and flowability characteristics 
to play sand.
This event is supported by Cleveland-Cliffs Foundation and SkyCiv
BOOMILEVER C (CONT.)

©2026 - C12
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
BUNGEE DROP C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Each team will design one elastic cord to conduct drops at a given height(s) and attempt 
to get a mass placed in a bottle as close as possible to, but without touching, a landing surface.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2 	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 10 minutes 
EYE PROTECTION: B	
IMPOUND: Yes	
	
CALCULATOR:  Class II
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Each team must impound only one elastic cord, calibration data (if prepared), and tools. The calibration 
data are the only papers or notes that the competitors may bring into the competition area and 
must be impounded. Any tools used by teams to confirm heights, lengths, or mass during the time given 
for preparing their two drops must also be impounded. Electric and electronic tools are allowed.
b.	 Teams may bring up to two Class II calculators, which do not need to be impounded.
c.	 After impound, the event supervisor must provide the 
i.	
drop height values (for each height and bonus drop), 
ii.	 light and heavy mass values, 
iii.	 light and heavy mass lengths, and 
iv.	 drop instructions.
d.	 Teams must be able to answer questions regarding the design, construction, and operation of the 
device per the Building Policy found on www.soinc.org.
3.	 CONSTRUCTION PARAMETERS:
a.	 Teams must provide one elastic cord to be used for both drops that terminates with a circular closed 
metal ring with an inner and outer diameter of 1.9 +/- 0.8 cm (e.g., a key ring) that will not open.
b.	 The cord may consist of more than one material (contest rubber, nylon, latex tubing, thread, sewing 
elastic, metal springs, etc.) and more than one strand.
c.	 No physical modifications may be made to the elastic cord once it has been impounded, with the exception 
of marking drop locations on the cord before the drops. Physical modifications after impound constitute 
a construction violation.
d.	 Elasticity Test: While being suspended vertically, the bottom 0.50 m of the cord, not including the 
metal ring, must stretch to at least 1.00 m when a single 500 g mass is attached to the metal ring and 
return to approximately its original length after the mass is removed.	
e.	 No “self-limiting-brake” mechanisms such as a separate, parallel, non-elastic strand that “brakes” the 
fall of the mass with little to no rebound are used.
4.	 THE COMPETITION AREA:
a.	 Light and Heavy Mass:
i.	
Supervisors will supply a light mass and a heavy mass that will each be composed of a 500-591 mL 
plastic bottle, mass inside of the bottle, and an attachment mechanism (hook, clasp, carabiner, etc.) 
that will connect the team’s bottom cord ring to the bottle. When hung, the masses including the 
attachment mechanism will have a height of at most 35.0 cm. 
ii.	 The light mass and heavy mass, individually, will be the same for all drops.
iii.	 The light mass will have a total mass between 100.0 g and 300.0 g and be in increments of 25.0 g at 
regionals, 10.0 g at states, and 1.0 g at nationals.
iv.	 The heavy mass will have a total mass between 200.0 g and 300.0 g heavier than the light mass, at 
increments of 1.0 g.
b.	 Drop Heights:
i.	
At Regionals, there will be two total drops at one drop height, which will be between 2.00 and 
5.00 meters inclusive at an interval of 25.0 cm.
ii.	 At States, there will be four total drops - two drops at each of two different drop heights.  Both 
drop heights will be between 2.00 and 5.00 meters inclusive at an interval of 10.0 cm.   
iii.	 At Nationals there will be four total drops - two drops at each of two different drop heights.  
Both drop heights will be between 5.00 and 8.00 meters inclusive at an interval of 1.0 cm.   
iv.	 The Bonus Drop will be an additional single drop, trying to drop close to a Bonus Target Drop 
Distance (BTDD), rather than the landing surface.  The BTDD must be greater than 2.00 m 
and less than the drop height (regionals) or larger drop height (states/nationals).
v.	
The drop height will be measured from the bottom most point of the clamp/attachment portion 
at the top of the cord to the bottom landing surface.

©2026 - C13
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
BUNGEE DROP C (CONT.)
c.	 Supervisors must provide a top anchoring system/extended platform with a release mechanism (e.g., a 
clamp) to attach to the top end of the elastic cord.  All teams must use this anchoring system.
d.	 Supervisors must provide an accurate system for determining how close a team’s device came to the 
landing surface, and whether or not it touched. 
5.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 Teams will be given a total of 3 minutes to prepare their device in the holding area, followed immediately 
by 7 minutes to complete up to two drops at regionals and up to four drops at states and nationals 
as well as up to one bonus drop, if earned.
b.	 At States/Nationals, teams will perform two drops at the lower Drop Height first, then perform two 
drops at the higher Drop Height, followed by the Bonus Drop if eligible, which will be completed 
on the higher Drop Height.
c.	 Practice drops either in the competition area or within the vicinity of the competition area before 
or during competition are not allowed. Any drop, even if unintended or unannounced, will count 
as one of the drops allowed to the team.
d.	 A cord that is damaged during a drop will earn a Drop Score of 0.5x the total drop height and any 
remaining drops will be scored as incomplete.
e.	 The Heavy Mass Bonus.
i.	
Teams can choose to attempt the heavy mass only on the 2nd drop for each drop height. If 
used, the heavy mass bonus earned will only apply to the drop(s) that used the heavy mass.
ii.	 Teams that would like to attempt the heavy mass will attach the heavy mass (described in 5.a.) 
at the same closed ring as the 1st drop at each drop height, replacing the original light mass.
f.	 The Bonus Drop.
i.	
Teams with a drop score within the following parameters (30.0 pts at regionals, 20.0 pts at states, 
10.0 pts at nationals) must be invited to complete a single bonus drop at the BTDD. At Regionals, 
the Bonus Drop will be done using the same Drop Height setup. At States/Nationals, the Bonus Drop 
will be done on the higher of the two Drop Height setups.
ii.	 The bonus drop will consist of dropping the light mass so the bottom of the mass dips within (30.0 
cm at regionals, 20.0 cm at states, 10.0 cm at nationals) of the BTDD without passing the BTDD.
iii.	 Teams can earn a maximum of one bonus drop and are given no additional time to complete the 
bonus drop.
iv.	 Teams are not allowed to use the heavy mass during a bonus drop.
g.	 The supervisor will review with the team the data recorded on their scoresheet.
h.	 Teams who wish to file an appeal must leave their device with the event supervisor.
6.	 SCORING: 
a.	 Low score wins. Final Score (FS) = HS1 + HS2 (States/Nationals only) + BD. A scoring spreadsheet 
is available on the event page on www.soinc.org.
b.	 Height Score (HS) = The minimum DS for the two drops for each height.
c.	 Drop Score (DS) = Drop Distance + Bonus. If the heavy mass is used for that drop, -20.0 points is 
added to the Drop Score for that drop. The heavy drop bonus can only be applied to the 2nd run 
for each drop height and only if the mass does not strike the landing surface for that drop.
i.	
The Drop Distance is defined as the distance between the lowest point of the mass and the 
landing surface on its initial descent.
ii.	 A drop that strikes the landing surface will have a DS of 0.5x the drop height. 
iii.	 Any drops not completed within the 7 minute test period will have a DS equal to the entire 
drop height.
d.	 Bonus Drop (BD) — If the bottom of the mass is dropped within the distance of the BTDD at its 
lowest point on the bonus drop (described in 6.e.ii.), BD = -15.0 points. Otherwise, BD = 0.0 points.
e.	 Devices will be placed in tiers as follows:
i.	
Tier 1: Device meets all construction parameters for all drops.
ii.	 Tier 2: Device still has construction parameter violation(s) during any drop.
iii.	 Tier 3: A team with its device and/or tools not impounded or uses calibration data notes that 
were not impounded.

©2026 - C14
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
f.	 Teams that are prohibited from launching due to unsafe operation will receive Participation Points 
only.
g.	 Tiebreakers:
i.	
1st: Whether a team succeeded in the bonus drop.
ii.	 2nd: The number of drops completed using the heavy mass.
iii.	 3rd: The team with the lowest individual drop score for any of their drops (not including 
bonus drop).
iv.	 4th: Lowest non-scored drop score.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
BUNGEE DROP C (CONT.)

©2026 - C15
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Teams will complete one or more tasks and answer a series of questions involving the 
science processes of chemistry focused in the areas of chemical reactions/stoichiometry and kinetics.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes 
EYE PROTECTION: C	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class III
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Each participant must bring safety equipment (e.g., goggles, lab coat, apron), a writing implement, and 
may bring a Class III calculator.
b.	 Each participant may bring one 8.5” x 11” sheet of paper, which may be in a sheet protector sealed by tape 
or laminated, with information on both sides in any form and from any source.
c.	 Teams should bring any or all of the items listed on the Division C Chemistry Events Lab Equipment List, 
posted on soinc.org. Teams not bringing these items will be at a disadvantage, as they are not provided.
d.	 Participants must wear goggles, an apron or a lab coat and have skin covered from the neck down to the 
wrist and toes. Gloves are optional, but if the host requires a specific type they will notify teams. Pants 
should be loose fitting; if the host has more specific guidelines, they will notify teams in advance of the 
tournament. Shoulder length or longer hair must be tied back. Participants removing safety clothing/ 
goggles or unsafely handling materials, or equipment will be penalized or disqualified.
e.	 Supervisors will provide any required reagents, additional glassware, and/or references that are needed for 
the tasks (e.g., Periodic Table, table of standard reduction potentials, any constants needed).
3.	 THE COMPETITION: 
a.	 The competition will consist of a series of tasks focused on the areas of chemical reactions/stoichiometry 
and kinetics. These tasks could include hands-on activities, questions on listed topics, interpretation of 
data (e.g., graphs, diagrams, tables), or observation of an established and running experiment. At least 2 
activities, one on each topic, are required.
b.	 Teams may be asked to collect data using a probe ware set-up demonstrated by the Supervisor(s). Following 
a demonstration of the sensors/probes, participants may be given data sets to interpret.
c.	 Nomenclature, formula writing, & stoichiometry (mole conversions & percentage yield) are essential tools 
of chemistry & may be included in the event. Participants are expected to know the symbols & charges 
for: nitrate, carbonate, phosphate, acetate, sulfate, ammonium, bicarbonate, & hydroxide. Participants 
should know how to use the “ite” form of anion (one less oxygen than the “ate” form). With a periodic 
table, participants should be able to obtain charges for monatomic ions (e.g., Na+, S2-).
d.	 Participants should understand the following about Chemical Reactions/Stoichiometry:
i.	
classification of reaction type.
ii.	 balancing reactions.
iii.	 reaction prediction (including predicting products of metathesis reactions, solubility, oxidation-
reduction, total ionic and net ionic equations).
e.	 Students will demonstrate an understanding of the principles of kinetics by:
i.	
Measuring reaction rates and identify how and why reaction conditions (temperature, 
concentration, particle size, and catalysts) affect reaction rates.
ii.	 At the state and national levels, teams will be asked to determine rate laws from actual 
experimentation or data provided, and teams should also be able to determine rate constants 
with correct units.
4.	 SCORING: 
a.	 High score wins. Points will be divided evenly between kinetics and chemical reactions/stoichiometry.
b.	 Time may be limited at each task but will not be used as a tiebreaker or for scoring.
c.	 Ties will be broken by pre-selected questions.
d.	 A penalty of up to 10% may be given if the area is not cleaned up as instructed.
e.	 A penalty of up to 10% may be given if a team brings prohibited lab equipment to the event.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
CHEMISTRY LAB C

©2026 - C16
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Participants must complete tasks and answer questions about electricity and magnetism.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2 	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class III
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Each team may bring a collection of notes and resources, written/printed on paper, of any size containing 
information in any form and from any source. Binders, notebooks, folders, sheet protectors, lamination, 
tabs, and labels are permitted. Participants are responsible for organizing and containing their notes 
efficiently. They may separate or remove the pages from containers for use during any part of the event. 
b.	 Each team may also bring writing utensils and two Class III calculators for use during any part of the 
event.
c.	 Event Supervisors must provide all supplies and measurement devices required for the hands-on tasks.
d.	 Participants may bring their own basic multimeters for use in place of provided ones at the discretion of 
the Event Supervisor.
3.	 THE COMPETITION:
Part I: Written Test
a.	 The written test will assess the team’s knowledge of electricity and magnetism.
b.	 Unless otherwise requested, answers must be in metric units with appropriate significant figures.
c.	 The test will consist of at least one question from each of the following areas only:
i.	
Properties of electric charges/fields, sources/hazards of static electricity, Coulomb’s Law, capacitance 
ii.	 Direct current (DC) characteristics, sources, uses, DC hazards 
iii.	 Alternating current (AC) characteristics, sources, uses, AC hazards, common household AC 
components
iv.	 Concepts and units of current, voltage, resistance, power, energy, and using Ohm’s law 
v.	
Magnetic poles/fields, electromagnets, transformers, motors/generators, right-hand rule 
vi.	 Electrical control devices including switches, relays, fuses, ground fault circuit interrupters, and 
breakers
vii.	 Simple calculations, constructions, and configurations of a circuit and individual components, 
including simple circuit diagrams 
viii.	Simple circuit analysis using Kirchhoff’s Voltage & Current Laws 
ix.	 Historical perspective of the electricity and magnetism discoveries made by Ampere, Coulomb, 
Kirchhoff, Volta, Ohm, Tesla, & Faraday 
x.	 States/Nationals only: 
(1)	Fundamental characteristics and operation of a light emitting diode (LED) 
(2)	Basic electrical characteristics of silicon PN junctions (e.g., Diodes, PNP, NPN)
(3)	Basic operating principles and applications of Operational Amplifiers (op-amps)
d.	 Topics not included in the competition are: semiconductors (beyond those listed above), AC circuit 
theory, frequency analysis, inductance, calculations involving direct use of calculus and/or differential 
equations, non-linear devices, 3 Phase Power, and oscilloscopes.
Part II: Hands-On Tasks
a.	 The hands-on portion will consist of at least one task for the teams to complete.
b.	 Participants must be familiar with the operation of breadboards and multimeters and how to use them.  
Participants may ask Event Supervisors for details of the internal wiring of any breadboards used for the 
tasks.
c.	 The hands-on tasks, or stations, may include but are not limited to:
i.	
Determine the value of a mystery resistor in a circuit using only voltage measurements.
ii.	 Calculate the power supplied to a circuit. 
iii.	 Given some wires, batteries, resistors, and 2 LEDs, hook them up so the LEDs are equally bright. 
iv.	 Construct an electromagnet using some wire, a bolt and battery.
v.	
Given a USB charger, read the label and provide details of the various output power levels it can 
provide and calculate how long it would take to charge a specific battery.
CIRCUIT LAB C

©2026 - C17
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
4.	 SCORING:
a.	 High score wins.
b.	 Points will be awarded for correct answers, measurements, calculations, and data analysis.
c.	 The written portion of the competition will account for 50-75% of each team’s score. 
d.	 The hands-on portion of the competition will account for the remaining 25-50% of each team’s score.
e.	 Ties will be broken using pre-selected task(s)/question(s) that may be noted on the written test.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
CIRCUIT LAB C (CONT.)

©2026 - C18
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
CODEBUSTERS C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Teams will cryptanalyze and decode encrypted messages using cryptanalysis techniques 
for historical and modern advanced ciphers.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 3	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class II
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Teams must bring writing utensils and may bring up to three Class I or Class II calculators.
b.	 No resource materials or other tools, except those provided by the Event Supervisor, may be used.
c.	 The Event Supervisor will provide scratch paper for each team to use.
d.	 The exam packet must be printed single-sided to facilitate separation and writing answers by individual 
team members. Using a separate answer sheet is not recommended.
e.	 The exam packet will include a copy for each team member of a resource sheet with the Morse Code 
Table, English/Spanish letter frequencies, Porta Table, Baconian mappings, and modulus inverse tables 
as needed for the questions on the exam.
3.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 This event consists of participants decrypting ciphertext on a written or computer based exam.
b.	 Teams will begin the event simultaneously at the indication of the Event Supervisor.
c.	 Teams must not open the exam packet nor write anything prior to the “start” signal, nor may they write 
anything after the “stop” signal.
d.	 Participants are allowed to separate the pages of the test to be free to answer the questions in any order, 
working individually or in groups, attempting whichever of the questions seem right for them.
e.	 The code types that may be used at Division C Regional Tournaments are as follows:
i.	
Monoalphabetic substitution using Kl, K2, K3, or random alphabets as defined by the American 
Cryptogram Association (ACA) with or without a hint
(1)	Aristocrats - ciphertext with spaces included.
(2)	Patristocrats - ciphertext with spaces removed and letters grouped in sets of 5 encoded 
using a K1 or K2 alphabet.
ii.	 For aristocrats encoded using a Kl, K2 or K3 alphabet, the answer requested can be the keyword or 
key phrase used to construct the alphabet instead of the deciphered text.
iii.	 The Baconian Cipher - decrypting ciphertext encoded with the a and b values represented as one or 
more letters, glyphs, symbols, or character rendering variations (e.g., bold, underline, italic). Word 
Baconian Ciphers will include a “crib” of at least 4 letters.
iv.	 Xenocrypt (maximum of 2) - messages in Spanish encoded with a K1 or K2 English keyword 
alphabet.
v.	
Cryptanalysis of the Fractionated Morse Cipher - decrypting Morse code ciphertext encoded as 
letters and spaces with a “crib” of at least 4 plaintext characters.
vi.	 Cryptarithms - determining mapping values to letters in base 10 (decimal) mathematical equations 
and decoding a word or phrase using that mapping.
vii.	 The Porta Cipher - Decrypting ciphertext given a key.
viii.	Cryptanalysis of the Complete Columnar Transposition Cipher - Decrypting ciphertext encoded in 
9 columns or less given a “crib” which is no shorter than one less than the number of columns used.
ix.	 The Nihilist Cipher - Decrypting ciphertext given the keys.
x.	 The Hill Cipher - Decrypting ciphertext given the 2x2 encryption matrix.
xi.	 The 5x5 Checkerboard Cipher – Decrypting ciphertext given the Polybius key.
f.	 The code types that may be used on the exam at State and National competitions are as follows:
i.	
All Regional code types.
ii.	  Xenocrypt - at the State and National levels, at least two cryptograms and no more than three will 
be in Spanish, encoded using a K1 or K2 English keyword alphabet.
iii.	 Cryptanalysis of the Porta Cipher with a “crib” of at least 3 plaintext characters.
iv.	 The Hill Cipher - Decrypting ciphertext with a 3x3 decryption matrix provided.
v.	
Cryptanalysis of the Nihilist Cipher with a “crib” that is no shorter than double than the length of 
the keyword used.
vi.	 Cryptanalysis of the Complete Columnar Transposition Cipher - Decrypting ciphertext encoded in 
11 columns or less given a “crib” which is no shorter than three less than the number of columns 

©2026 - C19
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
CODEBUSTERS C (CONT.)
used.
vii.	 Cryptanalysis of the 5x5 Checkerboard Cipher encoded with two 5-letter keywords and a Polybius 
key given a “crib” of at least 5 characters.
g.	 For Aristocrats, Patristocrats, and Xenocrypts, no letter can ever decrypt to itself.
h.	 The first question of the exam will be timed.
i.	
The first question will be the decoding of an Aristocrat as defined by 3.e.i.(1).
ii.	 A team member should signal when his or her team has broken the cryptogram.
iii.	 Before the exam begins, the Event Supervisor will announce the nature of the signal that must be 
used (e.g., shouting “time”, or quietly raising hand).
iv.	 The time in seconds, to the precision of the device used, to solve the cryptogram will be recorded by 
the Event Supervisor or designee.
v.	
If a team gets the timed question wrong, they may attempt to answer the question repeatedly 
without penalty. The timing bonus will be calculated from the start of the event until the question is 
successfully answered by the team with two or fewer errors, or until 10 minutes have elapsed. After 
10 minutes, the timed question can still be answered but the timing bonus is zero.
i.	 Up to three questions which are not aristocrats, patristocrats, or xenocrypts will be marked on the exam 
as special bonus questions. At least one special bonus question will use the 5x5 Checkerboard Cipher 
(3.e.xii. or 3.f.vii.).
j.	 For Cryptanalysis problems providing a “crib” (3.e.iii., 3.e.v., 3.f.iii., 3.f.v., 3.f.vii.) with the exception 
of the Complete Columnar Cipher (3.e.viii., 3.f.vi.), the placement of the “crib” on the ciphertext will be 
clearly identified.
4.	 SCORING:
a.	 The high score wins. Final Score = Exam Score + Timing Bonus + Special Bonus.
b.	 The scores for each question will be added together to determine the exam score.
c.	 Unless otherwise specified, the final points will be determined based on the number of errors found in 
the decoded plaintext as is appropriate to the question.
i.	
Two or fewer errors will be scored as correct and result in full credit.
ii.	 Each additional error results in a penalty of 100 points but the penalty will not exceed the value 
of the question. For example, a 400-point question with 5 errors earns 100 points [400 - 3(100)] 
whereas the same 400-point question with 7 errors would earn 0 points, not -100 points.
d.	 For answers involving the keyword or key phrase for a K1, K2 or K3 alphabet (3.e.ii) the final points will 
be determined based on the number of errors found in the keyword or key phrase. For the Cryptarithm 
(3.e.vi), the final points will be determined based on the number of errors found in the decoded 
word or phrase.
i.	
Zero errors are required for full credit.
ii.	 Each error results in a penalty of 100 points but the penalty will not exceed the value of the question. 
For example, a 500-point question with eight (8) errors would earn 0 points, not -300 points.
e.	 A Timing Bonus can be earned based on the number of seconds it takes a team to correctly decode the 
first question. The timing bonus is equal to 2 x (600 - number of seconds). For example, 6 minutes = 2 
x (600-360) = 480 points.
f.	 A special Bonus can be earned by solving any of the questions marked as special bonus questions with 
no penalty points. The bonus will be awarded as follows: One solved = 150 points, Two solved = 400 
points, All three solved = 750 points.
g.	 Scoring example: Team A earns 3600 points on the exam and solved the timed question in 435 seconds 
and solved one Special Bonus question
	
Exam Score	
	
	
= 	
3600 points
	
+ Timing Bonus 2(600-435)	 =	
  330 points
	
+ Special Bonus (One=150)	 =	
  150 points
	
Final Score  	 	
	
	
4080 points
h.	 Tiebreakers: For teams that are tied, select questions predetermined by the Event Supervisor will be 
used to break the tie using the following criteria in this order: score, degree of correctness and number 
attempted.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.

©2026 - C20
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Teams will answer questions, solve problems, and analyze data pertaining to classic, 
evolutionary, and molecular genetics.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class II
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS: 
a.	 Each team may bring writing utensils.
b.	 Each team may bring two Class II calculators.
c.	 Each team may bring one (1) 8.5” x 11” sheet of paper that may contain information on both sides in any 
form and from any source. The sheet of paper may be laminated or placed in a sheet protector to increase 
durability. Affixed labels, as well as multiple sheets of paper (whether in a single sheet protector or not) 
are prohibited.
3.	 THE COMPETITION: This Event will be administered as a written test which may be arranged in stations. 
Questions will emphasize process skills such as quantitative reasoning, making calculations, analyzing 
and interpreting experimental results, and drawing evidence-based conclusions. The Event will cover 
topics listed below without overemphasis on any one particular topic. The list of topics and subtopics should 
be considered exhaustive. 
a.	 For each of the following topics, participants will be expected to use quantitative reasoning and 
computational skills, analyze and interpret experimental results, and draw evidence-based conclusions. 
i.	
Mendelian Genetics
(1)	Describe Mendel’s Laws of Inheritance and their implications in heredity. Describe inheritance 
patterns which violate these laws (i.e. linkage, incomplete and codominance, complementation). 
(2)	Use provided information to construct Punnett Squares of mono-, di- and trihybrid crosses.
(3)	Predict genotypes and phenotypes of offspring and compute their likelihood based on Punnett 
Squares and experimental data using probability rules.
(4)	Evaluate pedigrees to predict modes of inheritance (i.e. dominant vs recessive traits, autosomal 
vs sex-linked traits) and construct pedigrees based on data from a case study.
(5)	Understand epistasis and its implications in predicting genetic outcomes.
(6)	State and Nationals only: Map two (State) or three (National) genes on a chromosome based on 
recombination frequency data.
ii.	 Mitosis and Meiosis
(1)	Understand, compare, and contrast the major stages and key structures in mitosis and meiosis.
(2)	Describe the effects of nondisjunction and use data from karyotypes to detect chromosomal 
abnormalities.
(3)	State and Nationals Only: Understand somatic recombination in the context of immune cell 
V(D)J recombination and immunoglobulin class switching.
iii.	 Population & Evolutionary Genetics
(1)	Understand the assumptions and calculations that underlie the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and 
the consequences of violating these assumptions. Be able to make these calculations given data.
(2)	Understand and explain the relationships between changing allele frequencies and genetic drift, 
founder effects, and bottlenecks, migration, and relative fitness.
(3)	Explain how additive alleles generate continuous variation and estimate the number of genes 
contributing to a trait.
(4)	Understand the role gene duplication plays in the evolution of the genome and new genes. Be 
able to identify homologs, orthologs, and paralogs.
(5)	Understand how a phylogenetic tree shows evolutionary histories and interpret phylogenies of 
nuclear, organellar, and extrachromosomal elements. Describe the basic steps of constructing a 
phylogenetic tree beginning with sequence data input.
(6)	State and Nationals only: Understand how heritability is used to explore phenotypic variation 
in a population. Calculate broad-sense heritability, narrow-sense heritability, and realized 
heritability.
iv.	 Molecular Biology of DNA
(1)	Be able to identify and explain the components of DNA (i.e. structure of the nucleotides and 
backbone), directionality of DNA (5’ and 3’ ends), rules in the context of DNA structure and 
base pairing.
DESIGNER GENES C

©2026 - C21
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
(2)	Understand the stages of DNA replication, from assembly of the pre-replication complex to 
termination, understand in detail the processes that happen at the replication fork.
(3)	Understand how DNA polymerases achieve fidelity of replication, and the mechanisms behind 
DNA proofreading.
(4)	Identify and understand the organization of DNA structure, such as plasmids, chromatin 
complexes, euchromatin and heterochromatin, and chromosomes. 
(5)	Understanding the processes in which DNA gets damaged and the mechanisms for DNA 
repair.
(6)	Identify, explain, and classify DNA mutations on the DNA level (i.e. chromosomal 
rearrangements, insertions, deletions, and substitutions), and the potential impact of the 
resulting protein sequence (i.e. frameshift, silent, missense, and nonsense mutations). 
v.	
Prokaryotic gene expression and regulation
(1)	Be able to explain the Central Dogma of Molecular Biology and reverse transcription.
(2)	Transcription: Understand and explain initiation, elongation, and termination stages of 
transcription, the mechanism of RNA polymerase.
(3)	Understand the role and general locations of cis- and trans-regulatory elements (i.e. promoters, 
enhancers, silencers, riboswitches, transcription factors) in the context of a gene and the lac 
and trp operons.
(4)	Translation: Understand and explain the initiation, elongation and termination stages of 
translation, the mechanism of the ribosome, the role mRNA and tRNA play in translation, and 
how translation is regulated.
(5)	State and Nationals only: Understand protein secretion systems in the context of the Sec and 
Tat systems.
vi.	 Technology and Techniques
(1)	Polymerase chain reaction (PCR): Describe what occurs and which molecules are involved 
in the denaturation, annealing, and extension steps of a PCR reaction; Explain the role 
of temperature in PCR; Identify the components needed for a PCR reaction; Identify 
experimental questions which could be addressed by PCR.
(2)	Sanger sequencing: Describe how the steps and components in Sanger sequencing differ from 
a standard PCR reaction; Identify experimental questions which could be addressed by Sanger 
sequencing.
(3)	Next-gen (Illumina) vs. third-gen (Nanopore) sequencing: Describe the major platforms used 
for Next-Gen (Illumina) sequencing. Compare and contrast these methods in terms of how 
they are performed, data produced, and questions the data addresses.
(4)	Molecular cloning: Describe the major steps in cloning a gene of interest to be expressed in 
a specific organism. Understand the utility of plasmids, restriction enzymes, PCR, Gibson 
assembly, and blue-white screens in the context of molecular cloning.
(5)	Knockout/knockdowns: Understand how knockout, knockdown, and complementation 
experiments are used to determine gene function. Compare and contrast knockdowns and 
knockouts and explain why one may be used over the other. State and Nationals only: Describe 
techniques used to generate knockdown/knockouts (i.e. RNAi, homologous recombination, 
CRISPR and TALENs).
(6)	State and Nationals only: Describe the basic procedure, applications, and limitations of the 
following techniques: ChIP-seq, Hi-C, RNA-Seq.
4.	 SCORING:
a.	 High score wins. Selected questions may be used as tiebreakers.
b.	 Points will be awarded for quality and accuracy of answers, quality of supporting reasoning, and the use 
of proper scientific methods.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
DESIGNER GENES C (CONT.)

©2026 - C22
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Participants will use their investigative skills in the scientific study of disease, injury, 
health, and disability in populations or groups of people.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class II
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Each team may bring writing utensils.
b.	 Each team may bring two Class II calculators.
c.	 Each team may bring one (1) 8.5” x 11” sheet of paper that may contain information on both sides in any 
form and from any source. The sheet of paper may be laminated or placed in a sheet protector to increase 
durability. Affixed labels, as well as multiple sheets of paper (whether in a single sheet protector or not) 
are prohibited.
3.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 This event addresses three topics related to disease, injury, health, and disability in populations or 
groups of people. Each part should count approximately equally towards a team’s final score. Questions 
should be process-oriented and involve skills in evaluation and interpretation. Matching pathogens with 
specific diseases (i.e. – What causes X disease?) or knowledge of signs, symptoms or epidemiologic 
characteristics such as incubation or latency periods or infectious dose is not part of this event. However, 
it is appropriate to provide this information as background information and expect competitors to be able 
to use it.
b.	 The topics for this event are as follows:
i.	
Background & Surveillance
(1)	Understand the Clinical Approach (health of individuals) vs Public Health Approach (health of 
populations).
(2)	Understand the history and development of epidemiology.
(3)	Understand the roles of epidemiology in public health and the steps in solving health problems.
(4)	Understand the Natural History and Spectrum of Disease. Understand in broad terms the 
impact of infectious (bacterial, viral, fungal, protest and prion diseases) and noninfectious 
causes of disease (such as accidents, exposures, and toxicities).
(5)	Understand the basic epidemiological and public health terms found in the glossary of CDCs 
Principles of Epidemiology in Public Health Practice (e.g., outbreak, epidemic, pandemic, 
surveillance, risk, vector, etc.).
(6)	Understand the role of Surveillance in identifying health problems, the 5-Step Process for 
Surveillance, the types of surveillance and the attributes of a surveillance system.
ii.	 Outbreak Investigation
(1)	Analyze actual or hypothetical outbreaks given in case scenarios.
(2)	Understand Experimental and Observational studies and the Types of Epidemiological 
Studies – (e.g., case control, cohort, ecological, cross-sectional. Know the advantages and 
disadvantages of each. Recognize various fundamental study designs and identify which is 
appropriate to use in analysis of presented outbreak scenarios.
(3)	Identify the Steps in an Outbreak Investigation and how they guide hypothesis generation.
(4)	Identify the problem using person, place, and time triad to formulate case definitions.
(5)	Interpret epi curves, line listings, cluster maps, subdivided tables, PFGE gels, SNP mapping 
and the PulseNet concept.
(6)	Understand the agent, host, environment triad and chain of transmission.
(7)	Evaluate data by calculating and comparing simple rates and proportions such as attack rate, 
relative risk, odds-ratio, and explain their meaning. Determine whether presented data support 
hypotheses of disease within scenarios, and revise hypotheses as appropriate.
(8)	Apply the Bradford Hill Criteria for Verifying the Cause of presented outbreaks. Compare the 
accuracy of Bradford Hill criteria, Koch’s and Evan’s postulates, and newer causality models 
such as Directed Acyclic graphs, Sufficient/component cause models, and GRADE methods.
DISEASE DETECTIVES C

©2026 - C23
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
(9)	Recognize factors such as study design/biases, errors, and confounding that influence results. 
Be able to propose appropriate control or comparison groups and data collection methods, 
and recognize limitations. Be able to interpret and use confidence intervals for measures 
of association. Competitors need not be able to calculate these confidence intervals since 
this is most often done through computer programs. Understand and use methods such as 
stratification and adjusted rates. Know the experimental and observational methods used to 
calculate vaccine effectiveness and efficacy and be able to use them.
(10)	Understand the concept of herd immunity. Be able to calculate and interpret herd immunity 
threshold, basic and effective reproductive numbers.
(11)	Nationals Only: Suggest types of control & prevention measures for outbreaks and other 
public health problems.
iii.	 Patterns, Control, and Prevention
(1)	Identify patterns and trends of epidemiologic data in charts, tables and graphs.
(2)	Using given data, calculate disease risk and frequency ratio, proportion, incidence proportion 
(attack rate), incidence rate, prevalence death rate and mortality rate.
(3)	Understand the Strategies of Disease Control as they apply to given disease scenarios.
(4)	Understand Strategies for Prevention, including the Scope and Levels of Prevention.
(5)	Propose a reasonable set of prevention strategies for public health problems within the 
scenarios provided, once the cause has been determined by your analyses.
(6)	Nationals Only: Identify the strengths and weaknesses of a set of proposed prevention 
strategies and analyze pre-and post-intervention data, to determine effectiveness of presented 
strategies.
4.	 SCORING:
a.	 High score wins. Selected questions may be used as tiebreakers.
b.	 Points will be assigned to the various questions and problems. Both the nature of the questions and 
scoring will emphasize an understanding that is broad and basic rather than detailed and advanced.
c.	 Depending on the problem, scoring may be based on a combination of answers, including graphs/charts, 
explanations, analysis, calculations, and closed-ended responses to specific questions. Critical reasoning 
skills and data interpretation with hypothesis generation will be evaluated.
d.	 Points will be awarded for both quality and accuracy of answers, the quality of supporting reasoning, and 
the use of proper scientific methods.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
In partnership with the Centers for Disease Control (CDC)
DISEASE DETECTIVES C (CONT.)

©2026 - C24
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
DYNAMIC PLANET C - OCEANOGRAPHY
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Teams will complete tasks related to physical and geological oceanography.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes 
	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class II
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Each team may bring a binder of any size containing information in any form and from any source. Sheet 
protectors, lamination, tabs, and labels are permitted. If the event features a rotation through a series of 
laboratory stations where the participants interact with samples or displays; no material may be removed 
from the binder throughout the event.
b.	 Each team may bring two Class II calculators.
3.	 THE COMPETITION: Participants will be tested over the following topics in the form of an exam and/or 
timed stations:
a.	 Seawater properties’ distributions and the processes affecting them:
i.	
Temperature (e.g. thermocline, sea surface temperature)
ii.	 Salinity (e.g. effect of water cycle, salt sources)
iii.	 Pressure & density (e.g. three-layer model, stratification, mixing)
iv.	 Other properties (e.g. nutrient concentrations, pH, chlorophyll)
b.	 Surface circulation:
i.	
Warm and cool currents
ii.	 Coriolis effect
iii.	 Surface convergence and divergence
iv.	 Western intensification
v.	
Ekman transport
vi.	 Eddies
c.	 Large-scale circulation:
i.	
Thermohaline circulation
ii.	 Global ocean energy transport
iii.	 Water masses and fronts
iv.	 Deep water formation
d.	 Waves:
i.	
Wave types (e.g. wind waves, tsunamis, storm surge) & their formation
ii.	 Wave interaction with coasts (e.g. surf, wave shoaling)
iii.	 Related properties, including but not limited to wave velocity, wave height, wavelength, period, and 
fetch
e.	 Tides:
i.	
Diurnal/semidiurnal/mixed patterns
ii.	 Spring/neap tides
iii.	 Resonance
iv.	 Tidal currents
f.	 Coastal features and processes:
i.	
Estuaries
ii.	 Coastal erosional and depositional landforms
iii.	 Formations of coral reefs; atolls
iv.	 Longshore currents, rip currents
v.	
Coastal upwelling and downwelling
g.	 Geological oceanography:
i.	
Tectonic processes in ocean basins (e.g. seafloor spreading and associated evidence, oceanic crust 
composition and evolution)
ii.	 Ocean floor features (e.g. ridges, seamounts, trenches, continental rise/slope/shelf)
iii.	 Oceanic sediment (e.g. sediment types, turbidity currents/turbidites, abyssal plains)
h.	 Climate variability and change:
i.	
Atmosphere/ocean variability, limited to El Niño Southern Oscillation, Pacific Decadal Oscillation, 
Southern Annular Mode
ii.	 Ocean climate change effects (e.g. sea level rise, thermal expansion, coastal flooding, acidification, 
deoxygenation)

©2026 - C25
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
i.	 Oceanic tools used for research (e.g. water samples, sediment cores, seawater velocity trackers, sonar 
and acoustic sensing, CTD devices)
j.	 Pressure-gradient force, geostrophic balance, Rossby waves, Kelvin waves
4.	 SCORING: Points will be awarded for the quality and accuracy of responses. High score wins. Ties will be 
broken by the accuracy and/or quality of answers to selected questions.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
In partnership with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the North American 
Association for Environmental Education (NAAEE)
DYNAMIC PLANET C (CONT.)

©2026 - C26
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Teams design, build, and test one vehicle that uses electrical energy as its sole means of 
propulsion to travel in a set amount of time and stop close to a Target Point.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2 	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 12 minutes 
	
IMPOUND: Yes 
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Vehicle will be designed and built by the team prior to the competition.
b.	 Impound: Team must impound before the first time slot.
c.	 Event Time: Teams will each have 8 minutes to adjust, repair, and run their Vehicle.
d.	 Track: The Event Supervisor will provide and set up the Track as listed in the Track section.
3.	 CONSTRUCTION PARAMETERS:
a.	 Electrical Energy used by the Vehicle for any purpose must come from a maximum of eight (8) AA 
batteries.
i.	
No battery containing lithium or lead acid is permitted. Teams using these batteries will not be 
permitted to run and will receive only participation points.
ii.	 Energy storage methods which allow teams to exceed the instantaneous energy available from 
the batteries are not allowed.  An example would be large capacitors or a spring.
iii.	 Electronic sighting, alignment, or aiming devices may have their own separate power source. Lasers 
are prohibited. 
iv.	 All sources of energy must be in easily accessible locations for inspection by the ES.
b.	 Propulsion Energy: must be electric and come from the batteries.  
c.	 Components may be purchased or made by the team members.  Electronic components are allowed.
i.	
If a microprocessor is used, students may communicate with their device over WiFi, Bluetooth, 
or USB. 
d.	 Vehicle Length: The distance from the front of the front wheel(s) to the back of the back wheel(s) must 
not exceed 70.0 cm.
e.	 Vehicle Width: The Vehicle width must not exceed 35.0 cm at any point.
f.	 Measurement Point: The Vehicle must have a Measurement Point (MP) for distance measurements at the 
front of the Vehicle.
g.	 Remote Control: The Vehicle must not be remotely controlled or tethered.
h.	 Vehicle Parts: All parts of the Vehicle must move as a whole: no anchors, tethers, tie downs, launching 
ramps, or other separate pieces are allowed. The only parts allowed to contact the floor during the run are 
wheels/treads, and any parts already in contact with the floor in the ready-to-run configuration. Pieces 
falling off during the run constitutes a Construction Violation.
i.	 Design Knowledge: Answer questions on design, construction, and operation of the device per the 
Building Policy found on www.soinc.org.
4.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 Impound before first time slot.
i.	
Teams must impound one Vehicle, batteries, spare parts, alignment device (if used), and any papers 
(if used). 
ii.	 Batteries must be stored separately from Vehicle and presented to ES for inspection if asked.  Teams 
will be allowed to correct if an issue is found.
iii.	 Tools do not need to be impounded.
iv.	 Inspections will NOT take place during impound as any of the 15 member team may impound.
b.	 After Impound and before the first time slot, the Target Distance and Target Time will be announced 
and posted.  The Target Distance and Target Time at a competition will be the same for all teams.
c.	 Check-In
i.	
Only the participants will enter and may bring tools as defined. 
ii.	 Teams will be instructed by the ES when to retrieve their impounded items.
iii.	 Teams will present their Vehicle for inspection and measurement by the ES.  Participants will be 
notified at this point if any construction violations are found.
(1)	A construction violation will be awarded to all runs if more than one Vehicle was 
impounded.  
ELECTRIC VEHICLE C

©2026 - C27
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
ELECTRIC VEHICLE C (CONT.)
(2)	Teams may use their Event Time to correct any construction violations.  A team’s Event Time 
will be paused during re-evaluation by the ES.
iv.	 Once participants start the Check-In process, they must not leave or gain any outside assistance or 
materials until their Event Time is completed.
v.	
Participants may not use an AC outlet power during their time slot.
vi.	 Unauthorized, generative AI tools (e.g., ChatGPT, DALL-E) are not allowed to be used to generate 
answers/code under any circumstances during the event.
d.	 Event Time
i.	
The Event Time ends after 2 runs or the time limit has been reached.  Teams may adjust their Vehicle 
(e.g., repair, wiring, change distance, aiming) within their Event Time.
(1)	The time limit for the Event Time is 8 minutes.
(2)	The ES will notify the participants when their Event Time starts.
(3)	Vehicles in the ready-to-run configuration before the end of the Event Time will be allowed to 
complete a run.
ii.	 Sighting, aligning, measurement, and guiding devices, if used, must be placed and used within the 
defined Track area.  Device(s) cannot be secured to the track.  If placed on the Vehicle, they may 
be removed at the team’s discretion. Devices remaining on the Vehicle will be considered part of the 
Vehicle. All items not part of the Vehicle must be moved and placed behind the Start Point prior to 
starting a run. Sighting, aligning, and guiding devices may use electricity.  Lasers are prohibited. 
iii.	 Teams may use their own tools to verify the Track dimensions during their Event Time.
iv.	 Substances applied to the Vehicle must be approved by the ES prior to use and must not damage or 
leave residue on the floor, Track and/or event area. Teams may clean the Track during their Event 
Time, but it must remain dry.
v.	
Teams may access the Internet to program their Device.  Any actions not required for 
programming will cause a team to be awarded a competition violation.  Internet access may 
not be available at all competitions.
vi.	 Teams must not roll or test the Vehicle on the floor of the Track on the day of the event without 
tournament permission. If permitted, only participants may be present.  During competition, teams 
must not roll the vehicle on the floor before or after runs.
vii.	 Individual Run Testing
(1)	Participants must place the Vehicle’s MP above the Start Point.
(2)	The Vehicle must be able to remain at the starting position without being touched until 
triggered.
(3)	Teams may choose to earn the Can Bonus by navigating between the two cans located 
on the Bonus Line.  All cans are positioned as outlined in the Track section.  There is no 
penalty if teams choose to run without the cans.
(a)	Outer can is placed by the ES.
(b)	Inner can is placed by the competitors.
(4)	Participants will notify the ES when ready to launch.  At which point the ES will pause the 
Event Time and review the Vehicle in the Ready-To-Run configuration for any violations.  
(a)	The ES will only notify the participants of competition violations at the end of each run.  
Teams may ask question(s) before the run if there are specific violations.  The ES will 
not answer generic questions like “Do I have a violation?”
(5)	ES will measure the Inside Can Distance.
(6)	Participants will use a #2 unsharpened pencil to start the Vehicle using a vertical motion.  Only 
the pencil may contact the Vehicle when triggered.
(a)	If the Vehicle fails to actuate or move when triggered, then a run has not occurred. The 
Vehicle must move to be a measurable run.  The participants may continue to work on their 
device provided they have not reached the end of their Event Time.
(7)	Once the run starts and until the Vehicle is retrieved, competitors may not use, view, or 
access their programming tool(s).
(8)	ES will review the run to determine if the run was Successful or a Failed Run.
(9)	Run Time and Vehicle Distance will be measured and recorded for Successful runs.
(10)	To earn the Can Bonus, all parts of the Vehicle must travel between the two cans. If the 
Inside Can Distance has changed, then the Can Bonus cannot be awarded.
(11)	Competitors following their Vehicle down the track before being called to retrieve their 
vehicle, will receive a Competition Violation.

©2026 - C28
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
(12)	All violations will be recorded.  The ES must notify the participants of any violations at the 
end of each run.
(13)	Timing resumes once the participants pick up their device or begin working toward the next 
run.
viii.	The Event Supervisor will review with teams their data recorded at the end of their Event Time. 
ix.	 Teams filing an appeal must leave their Vehicle and other impounded material in the event area.
5.	 SCORING:
a.	 Each team’s Final Score is the better of the 2 Run Scores + Final Score Penalties. Low score wins.
b.	 Run Score = 100 + Distance Score + Time Score + Bonuses + Run Penalties
c.	 Distance Score = 2.0 pt/cm x Vehicle Distance.  
i.	
The Distance Score for a Failed Run is 2500 points.
d.	 Time Score = Absolute value of (Target Time - Run Time)
i.	
The Run Time will be recorded as 0.00 seconds for Failed Runs.
e.	 Can Bonus = -0.5 x (110 - Inside Can Distance)
f.	 Event Time Bonus (National Only) = (Event Time Used - 480) / 30 points
g.	 Run Penalties:
i.	
Competition Violation: 150 points added to the Run Score with one or more violations.
ii.	 Construction Violation: 300 points added to the Run Score with one or more violations.
iii.	 Failed Runs can also be assessed Competition and/or Construction violations.
h.	 Final Score Penalties: Vehicle not Impounded: 5000 points added to the team’s Final Score.
i.	 Two or more teams tied with 2 Failed Run scores, without Competition or Construction Violations, will 
remain scored as ties. Other ties are possible.
j.	 Tiebreakers in order: 1. Better Vehicle Distance of the scored run; 2. Lower Time Score of the scored run; 
3. Better Vehicle Distance of the non-scored run; 4. Better Time Score of the non-scored run.
6.	 SCORING EXAMPLES:
a.	 A Vehicle has 2 Successful runs during the team’s Event Time.  Target time is 14 seconds.
i.	
In the 1st run, the Vehicle stopped 67.6 cm from the Target Point with a Run Time of 12.27 seconds 
with no cans.
ii.	 In the 2nd run, the Vehicle stopped 27.6 cm from the Target Point with a Run Time of 16.37 seconds 
with an Inside Can Distance of 50.0 cm 
Base Score
= 100
100.00
Distance Score
= 67.6 cm x 2.0 pts/cm
=
135.20
Time Score
= abs(14 - 12.27)
=
1.73
Can Bonus
= No Cans
0.00
1st Run Score
=
236.93
Base Score
= 100
100.00
Distance Score
= 27.6 cm x 2.0 pts/cm
=
55.20
Time Score
= abs(14 - 16.37)
=
2.37
Can Bonus
= -0.5 x (110.0 - 50.0)
-30.00
2nd Run Score
=
127.57
Final Score = 2nd Run Score (Better Score) = 127.57 pts
7.	 THE TRACK:
a.	 In-Person tournaments: The ES will supply and set up the Track.
b.	 Virtual tournaments:  Team will supply the Track that fully complies with the requirements of this section.  
Any deviation will be scored as a competition violation for all runs.
c.	 Track Definition:
i.	
The Track will be on a smooth, level, and hard surface.
ii.	 The Event Supervisors must mark the track as follows:
(1)	Start Point - an approximately 5 cm x 2.5 cm tape with the Start Point marked at the center of 
the tape.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE C (CONT.)

©2026 - C29
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
(2)	Target Point - an approximately 5 cm x 2.5 cm tape with the Target Point marked at the center 
of the tape.  The Target Point is placed at the Target Distance from the Start Point.
(3)	Bonus Line - an approximately 2.5 cm width tape placed halfway between the Start Point 
and the Target Point extending perpendicular from the imaginary center line at least 1.0 
meter to the left when facing the Target Point.  The edge of the line closest to the Start 
Point defines the line.
(4)	Imaginary Center Line is a line not placed on the Track that is from the Start Point to the 
Target Point.
iii.	 The two (2) Bonus Cans will be empty with a diameter of 7.0 to 8.0 cm and a height at least 
10.5 cm. For example, an empty can of corn.  All cans are placed upright with their center on 
the Bonus Line.
(1)	Outside Can is placed by the ES with the inside edge at 100.0 cm from the track’s 
imaginary center line.
(2)	Inside Can is placed by the competitors with the outside edge between 0.0 and 100.0 cm 
from the inside edge of the Outside Can.
iv.	 The Track Area will have a width of 2.0 m and extend at least 1.0 m behind the Start Point and 
beyond the Target Point. More space may be available but is not guaranteed.
v.	
At the ES’s discretion, more than one Track may be used. If so, the team may choose which Track 
they use but must use the same Track for both runs.
8.	 DEFINITIONS:
a.	 Event Supervisor (ES) is responsible for ensuring the event runs correctly.  The ES can assign one or 
more event helpers to perform various competition tasks.
b.	 Batteries are commercial batteries, including rechargeables, labeled as AA batteries.  Individual batteries 
must have a voltage between 1.2 and 1.5 volts when fully charged.  The battery label must be the 
manufacturer’s original label and easily viewable by the ES.  The batteries must be individual batteries 
and removable from a battery pack.  Batteries containing lithium or lead are prohibited.
c.	 Components can be, but not limited to, motors, gearboxes, motor controls, bodies, and chassis.
d.	 Electronic components can be, but not limited to, solid-state devices such as transistors, integrated 
circuits, diodes, and microprocessors.
e.	 Measurement Point (MP) must meet the following requirements:
i.	
The MP may be made of any material (e.g. wooden skewer, toothpick, pencil, dowel). Examples 
include but are not limited to: tip of a skewer/toothpick, tip of a pen, tip of a nail/paper clip/wire, 
corner of a wedge, the edge of a dowel.
ii.	 The MP must be less than or equal to 1.0 cm above the Track.
iii.	 The MP does not need to be the foremost part of the Vehicle, but its bottom must be easily accessible 
for measurements while the Vehicle is on the Track.
f.	 Tools may be electric and electronic tools.  To qualify as a Tool, the item must not travel on the Track 
with the Vehicle and cannot be used to align or aim the Vehicle.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE C (CONT.)

©2026 - C30
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
g.	 Target Distance is selected by the ES and will be between 7.00 and 10.00 meters.  At Regionals/
Invitationals the interval will be 0.25m, for States 0.10 m, and for National 0.01 m.
h.	 Target Time is selected by the ES and will be between 10.0 and 20.0 seconds.  The interval will be 0.5 
seconds for all tournaments.
i.	 Vehicle Distance is a point-to-point measurement from the Vehicle Measurement Point to the Target 
Point, measured to the nearest 0.1 cm.
j.	 Run Time begins when the team actuates the Vehicle and ends when the Vehicle comes to a complete 
stop. 
i.	
Recoil or oscillations will be included in the Run Time.  
ii.	 The Run Time is recorded in seconds to the precision of the timing device used.  
iii.	 Three timekeepers should be utilized with the middle time used as the official Run Time.
k.	 Complete Stop is when the Vehicle is stationary for 3 or more seconds.  The 3 seconds is not part of the 
Run Time.
l.	 Inside Can Distance is the distance measured along the Bonus Line between the inside edges of the two 
cans.
m.	Successful Run: Any run when the Vehicle moves before the end of the Event Time and is not a Failed 
Run.
n.	 Failed Run: A run will be scored as a Failed Run when one of the following occurs.  Construction and/
or Competition Violations must still be recorded for Failed Runs.
i.	
The Vehicle travels the wrong direction from the Start Point.
ii.	 The Vehicle starts before the Event Supervisor is ready.
iii.	 The Vehicle’s distance cannot be measured (e.g., the participants pick it up before it is measured).
iv.	 The team pushes the Vehicle down the track.
v.	
A team having only one successful run during the 8-minute Event Time will be assessed a Failed 
Run for a 2nd run score. If the Vehicle does not move during the Event Time, the team will be 
assessed 2 Failed Runs.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE C (CONT.)

©2026 - C31
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
ENGINEERING CAD C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Teams will read a set of engineering drawings and collaborate to CAD parts in Onshape 
and then incorporate these parts with provided components to create an assembly.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Teams will use Onshape (onshape.com/edu) on two computers with mice to create the model. 
b.	 Each participant must bring a laptop capable of running Onshape for the purposes of completing the 
event unless specified by the Event Supervisor.
i.	
Each participant may bring a wired or wireless mouse, a laptop charger, and writing utensils.
c.	 No resource materials, except those provided by the Event Supervisor, may be used.
d.	 Teams will be provided with a printed set of engineering drawings and a starting Onshape document 
with an assembly that has parts needed for creating the finished assembly. Teams will either be required 
to use their own Onshape accounts or use provided Onshape credentials at the discretion of the Event 
Supervisor.
3.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 Teams will use Onshape to CAD parts and an assembly based on the engineering drawings which specify 
the geometry, materials, and units for each part.
i.	
For Regionals, teams will be required to model 2 to 3 parts for use in the assembly.
ii.	 For State and Nationals, teams will be required to model 4 to 6 parts for use in the assembly.
b.	 Students on the team will work collaboratively on the parts and assembly.
4.	 SCORING:
a.	 The high score wins.
b.	 Event Score = Individual Part Scores (IPS) + Individual Assembly Score (IAS)
c.	 IPS is determined by comparing the mass of named parts as specified in the engineering drawing to the 
correct values.  A perfect match for the mass is 100 points. Answers cannot earn negative points and will 
be worth a minimum of 0 points. Points for each part will be calculated as:
    where   
d.	 IAS is determined by comparing the X, Y and Z component of the center of mass (CoM) of the named 
assembly as specified in the engineering drawing to the correct values.  A perfect match for the center 
of mass is 100 points and the minimum score is 0 points. Points for each assembly will be calculated as:
   where   
e.	 The tiebreaker is modeling time. The team with the lowest modeling time wins the tiebreaker. Time is 
measured from the moment the “Start assignment” button is pressed to the moment the “Submit” button 
is pressed. Work done after the last submission is not graded.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
This event is sponsored by Onshape.

©2026 - C32
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
ENTOMOLOGY C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Students will be asked to identify insects and selected immature insects by indicated 
taxonomy (order, subclass, or family), answer questions about insects, and use or construct a dichotomous 
key. All specimens will be representatives of insects found in the Contiguous United States.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS: 
a.	 Each team may bring one 2” or smaller three-ring binder, as measured by the interior diameter of the 
rings, containing information in any form and from any source. Sheet protectors, lamination, tabs, and 
labels are permitted. If the event features a rotation through a series of laboratory stations where the 
participants interact with samples, specimens, or displays, no material may be removed from the binder 
throughout the event.
b.	 Each team may also have one commercially produced field guide which may be tabbed or annotated.
c.	 In addition to their resource binder and field guide, each team may bring one (1) copy of either the 2026 
National Entomology List or a State or Regional Entomology List if issued.
d.	 Each team may bring one hand lens or magnifying glass. The Supervisor will provide dissecting 
microscopes, if needed.
3.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 Teams will be asked to identify an insect's Order, Subclass, Family or common name and answer a 
related question(s). Questions are limited to topics below and insects are limited to those listed on the 
2026 National Entomology List, which is based on the Insects of North America Princeton Field 
Guide (2023).
b.	 Insect specimens or images (nymph or larva for selected orders and families) will be exhibited so that 
students will be able to see pertinent features with the unaided eye or a hand lens. Students may be 
asked to use or formulate a simple dichotomous key to identify insects.
c.	 For each specimen, students will be asked correlated questions that pertain to the insect’s internal and 
external anatomy, ecology, economic characteristics, or systematics. 
d.	 Ecological characteristics may include habitats, adaptations to the environment, behavior, relationships 
(e.g. symbiosis and competition) with animals, plants, and public health, as well as climate change 
impacts. 
e.	 Economic characteristics may include beneficial or detrimental aspects of insects such as sources of 
food, medicine, disease, chemicals, nutrients, and insects as nuisance species. 
f.	 State and Nationals Only: For specimens, students may be asked questions that pertain to 
management. Such questions may pertain to pest/disease/invasive species concerns, Integrated 
Pest Management (IPM), conservation, and urban entomology. (IPM refers to preventing or 
suppressing damaging populations of insect pests by application of comprehensive and coordinated 
integration of multiple control tactics: chemical, biological, and cultural controls in context of 
their economic, environmental, and social consequences.)
4.	 SCORING: 
a.	 The high score wins.
b.	 Preselected questions will be used as tiebreakers.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.

©2026 - C33
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
2026 NATIONAL ENTOMOLOGY LIST
Specimens will be limited to those on the 2026 National Entomology List, made up of 26 orders, 2 
subclasses and 113 families. All specimens will be representatives of insects found in the Contiguous 
United States
•	
Orders or Families marked by an “*” require that the participants be able to recognize 
larvae or nymph forms. 
•	
Orders or Families designated in “Italics” are only to be used at the State and National 
levels of competition. 
•	
The taxonomic scheme is based upon the Insects of North America Princeton Field 
Guide (2023).
Class Entognatha
Order Protura - telsontails, proturans 
Subclass Collembola - springtails, snow fleas
Order Diplura - diplurans
Class Insecta
Order Archaeognatha - bristletails, 
Order Zygentoma - silverfish, firebrats
*Order Ephemeroptera - mayflies
*Order Odonata - dragon/damselflies
*Family Aeshnidae – darners 
*Family Gomphidae - clubtails
*Family Libellulidae - skimmers
*Family Lestidae - spread-wing
*Family Coenagrionidae - narrow-winged
Order Blattodea- cockroaches/termites 
Family Termitidae – termites
Family Blattidae – household roaches
Family Cryptocercidae – brown-hooded 
roaches
Order Mantodea - mantids
Order Embioptera - webspinners
Order Dermaptera - earwigs
*Order Plecoptera - stoneflies 
Order Orthoptera - grasshoppers & crickets
Family Tetrigidae - pygmy grasshopper
Family Acrididae - short-horned grasshoppers
Family Tettigoniidae - katydids 
Family Rhaphidophoridae - camel crickets
Family Gryllidae - crickets/tree crickets
Family Gryllotalpidae - mole crickets
Order Phasmatodea - walkingsticks 
Family Diapheromeridae - common 
walkingsticks
Order Psocodea - Book/Bark Lice 
Order Hemiptera - true bugs
Family Corixidae - water boatmen 
Family Notonectidae - backswimmers
Family Belostomatidae - giant water bugs
Family Nepidae - waterscorpions 
Family Gelastocoridae - toad bugs 
Family Gerridae - water striders 
Family Cimicidae - bed bugs 
Family Miridae - plant bugs 
Family Reduviidae - assassin bugs
Family Scutelleridae – metallic shield bugs
Family Tingidae - lace bugs 
Family Lygaeidae - seed bugs 
Family Coreidae - leaf–footed bugs
Family Pentatomidae - Stink bugs
*Family Cicadidae - cicadas 
Family Membracidae - treehoppers
Family Cercopidae - froghoppers, spittlebugs
Family Cicadellidae - leafhoppers 
Family Fulgoridae - fulgorid planthoppers
Family Aphididae - aphids
*Family Pseudococcidae – mealybug
*Family Coccidae – soft scale insect
Order Thysanoptera - thrips
*Order Megaloptera - dobsonflies 
Order Neuroptera - lacewings, Antlions
Family Chrysopidae - green lacewings
*Family Myrmeleontidae - antlions
Order Coleoptera - beetles 
Family Carabidae - ground and tiger beetles
Family Dytiscidae - predaceous diving beetles
Family Gyrinidae - whirligig beetles
Family Hydrophilidae - water scavenger 
*Family Psephenidae – water penny beetles
*Family Elmidae – riffle beetles
Family Histeridae - hister beetles
Family Staphylinidae - rove beetles
Family Silphidae - carrion beetles
Family Lucanidae - stag beetles 
Family Passalidae - bess beetles 
Family Scarabaeidae - dung beetles
Family Buprestidae - metallic wood-boring/
jewel beetles
*Family Elateridae - click beetles

©2026 - C34
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
2026 NATIONAL ENTOMOLOGY LIST (CONT.)
*Family Lampyridae - fireflies 
Family Cantharidae - soldier beetles
Family Lycidae - net-winged beetles
Family Cleridae - checkered beetles
*Family Coccinellidae - lady-bird beetles 
(ladybugs)
*Family Tenebrionidae – darkling beetles
Family Meloidae - blister beetles
*Family Cerambycidae - long-horned beetles
Family Chrysomelidae - leaf beetles
Family Curculionidae - weevils 
Family Zopheridae – diabolical ironclad 
beetles
*Family Cucujidae – flat bark beetles
Order Mecoptera - scorpionflies 
Family Boreidae - snow scorpionflies
Family Panorpidae - common scorpionflies
Order Raphidioptera - Snakeflies 
Family Raphidiidae - Raphidiid Snakeflies
Order Siphonaptera - fleas
Order Diptera - true flies
*Family Tipulidae - crane flies
*Family Culicidae - mosquitoes
*Family Chironomidae - midges
*Family Simuliidae - black flies 
Family Stratiomyidae - soldier flies
Family Tabanidae - horse flies	
Family Asilidae - robber flies 
Family Bombyliidae - bee flies
*Family Syrphidae - hover/flower flies
Family Tephritidae - fruit flies, husk fly
Family Drosophilidae - pomace flies, fruit/
vinegar flies 
Family Muscidae - house flies
*Family Calliphoridae - blow flies
Family Tachinidae - tachinid flies
*Family Oestridae - botflies
*Order Trichoptera - caddisflies 
Order Lepidoptera - moths and butterflies
Family Sesiidae - clear winged moths
Family Tortricidae - Tortrix moths
Family Hesperiidae - skippers
*Family Papilionidae - swallowtails
Family Pieridae - whites, sulfurs
Family Lycaenidae - hairstreaks, blues
*Family Nymphalidae - brush-footed butterflies
Family Geometridae - geometer moths
*Family Lasiocampidae - tent caterpillar/
lappet moths
Family Pyralidae - snout moths
Family Saturnidae – Giant Silkworm moths
*Family Sphingidae - sphinx/hawk moths, 
hornworms
*Family Erebidae - tiger/tussock moths
Family Noctuidae – owlet moths
Order Hymenoptera - bees/ants/wasps.
Family Tenthredinidae - common sawflies
Family Siricidae - horntails 
Family Ichneumonidae - ichneumons
Family Cynipidae - gall wasps 
Family Mutillidae - velvet-ants 
Family Formicidae - ants
Family Vespidae - paper wasps, hornets, 
yellowjackets
Family Sphecidae - thread- waisted wasps
Family Braconidae – braconid wasps
Family Halictidae - Sweat bees 
Family Megachilidae - leaf cutter bees
Family Apidae - bees 
Non Insect Arthropods 
Subclass Acari - Ticks
Family Ixodidae – Hardbacked tick

©2026 - C35
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Participants will be assessed on the ability to design, conduct, and report the findings of 
an experiment entirely on-site.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 3	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes 
EYE PROTECTION: C 	
	
	
CALCULATOR:  Class III
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Participants must bring goggles and writing utensils. Experiments will not require any other safety 
equipment.
b.	 Teams may bring one timepiece, one linear measuring device, and one stand alone Class III calculator. 
Teams CANNOT use any of these as part of the experiment - they must only be used for their intended 
function.
c.	 The Event Supervisor will provide each team with identical sets of materials either at a distribution 
center or in an individual container.
d.	 The Event Supervisor must provide the 2 part reporting packet posted on the event page at soinc.org, for 
teams to record their experimental information and data.  This packet must be printed single-sided to 
facilitate separation by individual team members.
3.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 The teams must design, conduct, and report the findings of an experiment conducted on site that 
addresses the assigned question/topic area provided by the Event Supervisor. The assigned question/ 
topic area should be the same for all teams and allow the participants to conduct experiments involving 
relationships between independent and dependent variables (i.e., height vs. distance).
b.	 During the first 20 minutes of the event, participants will receive the assigned question/topic area, 
materials, and Part I of the report packet. Participants will focus on designing and conducting their 
experiment.
c.	 After the first 20 minutes, participants will receive Part II of the report packet and will focus on analyzing 
their experiment and reporting findings. Participants may continue experimenting throughout the entire 
event.
d.	 Each team must use at least two of the provided materials to design and conduct an experiment. Teams 
failing to use at least two items will have their final score multiplied by 0.95. The materials will be 
listed on the board or placed on a card for each team. If provided, both the card and the container will be 
considered part of the materials. The identity of the materials will be unknown until the start of the event.
e.	 When a team finishes, all materials must be returned to the Event Supervisor including both parts of the 
report packet.
4.	 SCORING:
a.	 High score wins. Scoring will be done using the Experimental Design Checklist found on the Science 
Olympiad website (soinc.org).
b.	 Points will be awarded depending upon the completeness of the response. Zero points will be given for 
no responses as well as illegible or inappropriate responses.
c.	 Ties will be broken by comparing the point totals in the scoring areas of the checklist in the following 
order:
i.	
Analysis of Claim/Evidence/Reasoning
ii.	 Procedure and Set-Up Diagrams
iii.	 Variables
iv.	 Data Table
v.	
Graph
d.	 Any participant not following proper safety procedures will be asked to leave the room and will be 
disqualified from the event.
e.	 Any team not using at least 2 of the provided materials will have their final score multiplied by 0.95.
f.	 Any team not following clean-up procedures will have their final score multiplied by 0.95.
g.	 Any team not addressing the assigned question/topic area will have their final score multiplied by up to 
0.75 based on the extent to which the report deviates from the assigned topic.
h.	 Any team not collecting data by conducting an experiment on-site or falsifying/making up fake data 
will have their final score multiplied by 0.25.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.

©2026 - C36
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Given a scenario and some possible suspects, students will perform a series of tests. 
These tests, along with other evidence or test results, will be used to solve a crime.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes 
EYE PROTECTION: C	
	
	
CALCULATOR:  Class III 
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Each participant may bring one 8.5” x 11” sheet of paper, which may be in a sheet protector sealed by 
tape or laminated, that may contain information on both sides in any form and from any source without 
any affixed labels. 
b.	 Each participant may bring a Class III calculator.
c.	 Each team may bring any or all of the items listed on the Division C Chemistry Events Lab Equipment 
List, posted on soinc.org. Teams not bringing these items may be at a disadvantage. The Supervisor will 
not provide them.
d.	 Participants must wear goggles, an apron or a lab coat and have skin covered from the neck down to the 
wrist and toes. Gloves are optional, but if the host requires a specific type they will notify teams. Pants 
should be loose fitting; if the host has more specific guidelines they will notify teams in advance of the 
tournament. Shoulder length or longer hair must be tied back. Participants removing safety clothing/ 
goggles or unsafely handling materials or equipment will be penalized or disqualified.
e.	 The Supervisor will provide:
i.	
iodine reagent (I2 dissolved in KI solution)
ii.	 1M HCl
iii.	 1M NaOH
iv.	 Benedict’s solution
v.	
a hot water bath
vi.	 a Bunsen burner or equivalent BTU heat source to perform flame tests
vii.	 a waste container
viii.	chromatography materials (e.g., beakers, Petri dishes, etc.)
ix.	 a wash bottle with distilled water
f.	 The Supervisor may provide:
i.	
other equipment (e.g., a microscope, probes, etc.)
ii.	 candle & matches if fibers given
iii.	 differential density solutions or other method of determining density of polymers if plastics given
iv.	 reagents to perform other tests
3.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 The competition will consist of evidence from Parts 3.b. - e. and analysis of the evidence in Part 3.f. 
Analysis or questions can only be on the evidence topics included in the competition. The collected 
evidence and other data given may be used in a mock crime scene. The amount of evidence included will 
be according to the following table:
Level
Part b. # of 
samples
Part c. # of 
samples
Part d.
# of chromatograms
Part e. # 
of topics
Part f.
Regional
3-8
5-9
1 type + Mass Spectra
1-2
Required
State
6-10
6-12
1-2 types + Mass Spectra
1-3
Required
National
10-14
10-18
1-3 types + Mass Spectra
3-5
Required
b.	 Qualitative Analysis: Participants may be asked to identify the following substances: sodium acetate, 
sodium chloride, sodium hydrogen carbonate, sodium carbonate, lithium chloride, potassium chloride, 
calcium nitrate, calcium sulfate, calcium carbonate, cornstarch, glucose, sucrose, magnesium sulfate, 
boric acid, and ammonium chloride (there will be no mixtures). All teams will have the same set of solids 
to identify.
c.	 Polymers: Participants may be asked to identify:
i.	
Plastics: PETE, HDPE, non-expanded PS, LDPE, PP, PVC, PMMA, PC – Participants will not 
perform any burn tests on these plastics, but the Supervisor may provide burn test results on them.
FORENSICS C

©2026 - C37
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
ii.	 Fibers: cotton, wool, silk, linen, nylon, spandex, polyester - burn tests will be permitted on the fibers.
iii.	 Hair: human, bat, cow, squirrel, and horse - participants will need to know hair structure including 
medulla, cortex, cuticle, root and hair scale classification.
d.	 Chromatography/Spectroscopy: Participants will be expected to separate components using paper 
chromatography, TLC, and/or analyze mass spectra. Participants may be expected to measure Rfs.
e.	 Crime Scene Physical Evidence:
i.	
Fingerprint Analysis: Participants will be expected to know the 8 specific fingerprint patterns (plain 
arch, tented arch, radial loop, ulnar loop, plain whorl, central pocket whorl, accidental whorl,  and 
double loop whorl). Participants should also be familiar with the common fingerprint development 
techniques of dusting, iodine fuming, ninhydrin, and cyanoacrylate fuming.  Participants should 
understand terminology such as bifurcation, ridges, island, enclosure, loop, eye, spur, trifurcation, 
delta, and double bifurcation. Participants should be able to answer questions about skin layers 
and how fingerprints are formed. Participants may be asked questions on the different methods of 
detecting fingerprints and the chemistry behind each of these methods.
ii.	 DNA: Participants may be asked to compare DNA chromatograms/electropherograms from materials 
found at the scene to those of the suspects. Participants will be expected to know how DNA is 
copied. See http://educationalgames.nobelprize.org/educational/chemistry/pcr/
iii.	 Glass analysis: Participants may be asked to use index of refraction to determine the type of a glass 
found broken at a crime scene. They may be asked to analyze which hole or fractures occurred 
before others based on a piece of glass available for examination or a picture of a piece of glass.
iv.	 Entomology: Participants may be asked to identify how long an animal has been dead based on the 
type of insects found on the body at the scene.
v.	
Spatters: Participants may be asked to analyze actual spatters or photographs of spatters to determine 
the angle and velocity with which the liquid approached the solid object bearing the spatter & the 
spatter origin direction.
vi.	 Seeds and Pollen: Participants may be asked to compare pictures of seeds/pollen found at the scene 
with either seeds/pollen found on the suspects or seeds/pollen from different country regions.
vii.	 Tracks and Soil: Participants may be asked to match tire tracks or footprints found at the scene to 
tires or shoes of the suspects. Participants may be given the composition of soil found at the scene 
or on the suspects and asked to determine if this implicates any of the suspects.
viii.	Blood: Participants may be asked to identify the ABO blood type using artificial blood (Event 
Supervisor required to provide instructions on how the typing system works) or participants may be 
asked to identify if a blood sample, either prepared microscope slide or pictures of microscope slide, 
is human, avian, mammalian, or reptilian/amphibian.
ix.	 Bullet striations: Participants may be asked to match the striations on bullets or casings found at the 
crime scene and fired from a given gun.
f.	 Analysis of the Crime: Participants will be asked to write an analysis of the crime scene explaining not 
only which pieces of evidence implicate which suspect(s) and why the suspect(s) was (were) chosen as 
the culprit(s), but also why the other suspects were not chosen. They will also answer any other crime 
scene analysis questions posed by the Event Supervisor.
g.	 Teams will dispose of waste as directed by the Event Supervisor.
4.	 SCORING:
a.	 High score wins. Time will not be used for scoring.
b.	 The score will be composed of the following elements (percentages given are approximate): Part 3.b. ≈ 
20%, Part 3.c. ≈ 20%, Part 3.d. ≈ 15%, Part 3.e. ≈ 15%, and 3.f. ≈ 30%.
c.	 Ties will be broken by the highest score on the analysis of the crime scene, which includes the reasons 
why certain suspects have been eliminated or others remain in the pool of possible criminals.
d.	 A 10% penalty may be given if the area is not cleaned up as designated by the Event Supervisor.
e.	 A penalty of up to 10% may be given if a team brings prohibited lab equipment to the event.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
FORENSICS C (CONT.)

©2026 - C38
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Prior to the tournament, teams will construct, collect data on test flights, analyze and 
optimize free flight rubber-powered helicopters to achieve maximum time aloft.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2 	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 15 minutes 
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Teams may bring up to 2 helicopters, Flight Log, transportation boxes, tools, and equipment.
b.	 Teams must bring one or more Measurement Boxes; transportation and measurement boxes may be the 
same box.
c.	 The Event Supervisor will provide all other measurement tools and timing devices for scoring purposes.
3.	 CONSTRUCTION PARAMETERS:
a.	 Helicopters may be constructed from published plans, commercial kits, competitor’s designs, and/or 
other sources of design.  Kits, if used, must not contain any pre-glued joints or pre-covered surfaces.
b.	 The uppermost part of the helicopter (the part that would touch a flat ceiling first during flight) must be a 
flat balsa wood disc, large enough to cover a dime. The face of the disc must be the part that contacts 
the ceiling if the helicopter goes that high.
c.	 Any materials except Boron filaments may be used in construction of the helicopter and boxes.
d.	 The helicopter, in its flight configuration, must fit fully into a team-provided Measurement Box without 
a lid/cover.
i.	
The external dimensions of the Measurement Box must fit within a right, rectangular prism of 
32.0cm x 24.0cm x 47.0cm, including any external protuberances on the lidless box.
e.	 “Flight Configuration” means the helicopter is fully assembled and ready to fly. For example, no change 
in chord, span, length, or total lifting area can occur after removing the helicopter from its box and 
throughout the flight itself. Components that rotate during flight, such as propellers or rotors, may be 
rotated to allow the helicopter to fit into the box. The rubber motor(s) does not have to be on the helicopter 
or wound.
f.	 The helicopter may use up to three fixed rotors. There is no minimum limit on the number of blades 
or their chord. Rotors are defined as one or more separate lifting surfaces, referred to as blades, that 
contribute lift by rotating on a common path around a vertical axis. There must not be any other lifting 
surfaces.
g.	 Total mass of the helicopter, excluding the rubber motor(s), must be 4.0 g or more.
h.	 Participants must be able to answer questions on design, construction, and operation of the device per the 
Building Policy found on www.soinc.org.
4.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 Prior to day of Tournament
i.	
An indoor location will be selected by the Tournament officials.  The following will be announced:
(1)	The room dimensions (approximate length, width, and ceiling height).
(2)	Competition factors such as air currents.
b.	 Day of Tournament and prior to the first time slot:
i.	
The Event Supervisor will determine if:
(1)	Multiple official flights may occur simultaneously.
(2)	Practice flights may occur throughout the Competition, at the Event Supervisor's discretion, 
but must yield to any official flights.
(3)	No practice flights will occur in the final half-hour of the event’s last period. (Teams that 
declare a trim flight during their 10-minute Flight Period may still fly).
ii.	 Once participants enter the cordoned off competition area to trim, practice, or compete, they 
must not receive outside materials (except as permitted by the Event Supervisor), assistance, or 
communication. Only participants may handle helicopters until the event ends. Teams violating this 
rule will be ranked below all other teams. Spectators will be in a separate area.
c.	 Self-Check Inspection Station (Optional)
i.	
Prior to check-in with the Event Supervisor, a self-check inspection station may be made available 
to participants for checking their Measurement Box(es), and helicopters. Modifications may be 
made prior to check-in.
HELICOPTER C

©2026 - C39
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
d.	 Check-In
i.	
At check-in, participants will present their helicopters in Measurement Box(es) and Flight Logs for 
inspection immediately prior to their Flight Period.
(1)	Teams from the same school can share the same Measurement Box.
ii.	 The Event Supervisor will verify the external dimensions of the Measurement Box(es) and that the 
helicopter fits fully inside the Measurement Box while in its flight configuration. The helicopter’s 
overall dimensions must not change after being removed from the box. This may be verified by 
showing that the helicopter slides into and out of the box without changing shape at the discretion 
of the Event Supervisor.
iii.	 The participants will remove the helicopter from the box to allow for the mass to be measured.
iv.	 All motor(s) will be collected and returned to the team at the start of their 10-minute Flight Period.
v.	
Only participants should handle the helicopters or Measurement Box(es).
e.	 Flight Period
i.	
The 10-minute Flight Period begins when the Event Supervisor returns the motors to the team.
ii.	 Any flight beginning within the 10-minute Flight Period will be permitted to fly to completion.
iii.	 Participants may make adjustments/repairs/trim flights during their official Flight Period. 
iv.	 Before each launch, participants must indicate to the Timers whether a flight is an official flight or 
a trim flight. A flight is considered official if a team fails to notify the Timer(s) of the flight’s status.
v.	
Teams must not be given extra time to recover or repair their helicopter.
vi.	 Teams may make up to a total of 2 official flights using 1 or 2 helicopters.
vii.	 Time aloft for each flight starts when the helicopter leaves the participant’s hand and stops when 
any part of the helicopter touches the floor, the lifting surfaces no longer support the weight of the 
helicopter (such as the helicopter landing on a girder or basketball hoop) or the Event Supervisors 
otherwise determine the flight is over.
viii.	Event Supervisors are strongly encouraged to utilize three (3) timers on all flights.  The median 
flight time in seconds to the precision of the device used is the official Time aloft.
ix.	 Participants must not steer the helicopter during flights.
x.	 Students must be on the floor to launch from their hands.  Artificial aids cannot be used to increase 
launch height.
xi.	 In the unlikely event of a collision with another helicopter, a team may elect a re-flight.  The decision 
to re-fly may be made after the helicopter lands. Timers are allowed to delay a launch to avoid a 
possible collision. The 10-minute Flight Period does not apply to such a flight.
f.	 If requested by the Event Supervisor, the participants must demonstrate that each helicopter still fits fully 
inside the Measurement Box(es) in the flight configuration.  Teams may not manipulate the configuration 
of the helicopter in order to fit into the box except to rotate components that rotated during flight such as 
rotors. The helicopter’s overall dimensions must not change after being removed from the box. Motor(s) 
may be removed from the helicopter or left in place during the demonstration.
g.	 The Event Supervisor will review with teams their data recorded at the end of their Event Time. 
h.	 Teams filing an appeal must leave their Helicopter(s), Measurement Box(es), and Flight Log in the event 
area.
5.	 FLIGHT LOGS:
a.	 Teams may present a Flight Log of recorded data for a BONUS. This data must include 6 or more 
parameters (3 required and at least 3 additional) with data for 10 or more test flights prior to the 
competition.
i.	
The required parameters are:
(1)	Motor Size before wind-up
(2)	Number of Turns on Launch or Torque at Launch
(3)	Flight Time
ii.	 The team must choose 3 additional data parameters beyond those required (e.g. turns remaining at 
landing, estimated/recorded peak flight altitude, the motor torque at landing, propeller pitch, etc.)
b.	 All numeric data must include units which may be listed with the column headers of the log. Torque units 
may be “arbitrary” if an uncalibrated torque meter with arbitrary numbers is utilized.
c.	 All logs will be returned to teams after inspection.
HELICOPTER C (CONT.)

©2026 - C40
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
6.	 SCORING:
a.	 Highest Final Score wins. A team’s Final Score is the larger of the team’s Flight Scores.
b.	 Flight Score for each official flight=Flight Time x Bonuses (6.c).
c.	 Bonuses:
i.	
Teams with a complete Flight Log will receive a 20% bonus multiplier (x 1.2)
ii.	 Teams with a partial Flight Log will receive a 10% bonus multiplier (x 1.1).
iii.	 Teams without a Flight Log will receive no Flight Log bonus multiplier (x 1.0)
iv.	 Teams competing with only two-bladed rotors receive an additional 10% bonus multiplier 
(x1.1).
v.	
Example Score: For a flight time of 68.00 seconds with a completed Flight Log and using two 
bladed rotors the score would be : 68.00 x 1.2 x 1.1 = 89.76 points.
d.	 Teams that violate rule(s) under “CONSTRUCTION PARAMETERS” or “COMPETITION” that do not 
have a specific penalty will be ranked after all teams that do not violate those rules.
e.	 Ties will be broken by the longest non-scored official Flight Score.
7.	 DEFINITIONS:
a.	 Event Supervisor (ES) is responsible for ensuring the event runs correctly.  The ES can assign one or 
more event helpers to perform various competition tasks.
b.	 Flight Configuration means the helicopter is fully assembled and ready to fly. For example, no change 
in chord, span, length, or total lifting area can occur after removing the helicopter from its box and 
throughout the flight itself. Components that rotate during flight, such as propellers or rotors, may be 
rotated to allow the helicopter to fit into the box. The rubber motor(s) does not have to be on the helicopter 
or wound.
c.	 Rotors are defined as one or more separate lifting surfaces, referred to as blades, that contribute lift by 
rotating as a unit around a vertical axis.
d.	 Blade: A blade is a single aerodynamic surface that extends no more than 90 degrees around the axis of 
rotation of the rotor.
e.	 Trim Flight: A test or practice flight that is not used for official scoring.
f.	 Steering: Participants using something to control the direction of motion once the device is released. (ex. 
Balloons, poles, rods, air, etc.)
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
This event is sponsored by the National Free Flight Society (NFFS).
HELICOPTER C (CONT.)

©2026 - C41
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
HOVERCRAFT C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Prior to the competition, participants will design, construct, and calibrate a self-propelled 
air-levitated vehicle that moves down a track.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2 	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 10 minutes
EYE PROTECTION: B    	
IMPOUND: Yes 	
	
CALCULATOR: Class III
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Each team must impound only one vehicle and any papers/notes needed during the competition 
time. The vehicle must be impounded with the batteries stored separately and presented to the Event 
Supervisor for inspection. No additional papers/notes may be brought into the competition area 
after impound.
b.	 Teams may bring tools, supplies, spare parts, eye protection, and two Class III calculators. These items 
need not be impounded.
c.	 Participants must wear eye protection during vehicle setup and operation. Teams without proper eye 
protection must be immediately informed and given a chance to obtain eye protection if time allows.
d.	 The Event Supervisor will provide the testing materials listed in the TRACK section. Teams should not 
bring their own track or ramp.
e.	 Participants must be able to answer questions regarding the design, construction, and operation of the 
vehicle per the Building Policy found on www.soinc.org.
3.	 CONSTRUCTION PARAMETERS: 
a.	 The vehicle must fit into a 40.0 cm x 40.0 cm x 40.0 cm box when levitated in the ready-to-run 
configuration. Vehicles must not modify or damage the track.
b.	 The vehicle must levitate on a cushion of air as it moves down the track. Participants may be asked to 
demonstrate levitation by pushing the vehicle slightly down. If it then rises, it is levitating. Continuous 
contact of the inflated skirt with the base surface, occasional contact of other vehicle components with 
the base surface, or any contact with the inside edge of the side rails is permitted. 
c.	 All propellers/impellers, including those under the vehicle, must have shielding that prevents a 3/8” 
dowel from touching them.
d.	 Commercial batteries, including rechargeables, not exceeding 12.0V as labeled, may be used to energize 
each of the vehicle’s motors. The label on each battery must be the manufacturer’s original and easily 
viewable by the Event Supervisor. Multiple batteries may be connected together as long as the expected 
voltage across any two points does not exceed 12.0V, as calculated by their individual labels. The vehicle 
must not have any other energy sources. Batteries containing lithium or lead are prohibited. 
e.	 All motors must have a switch to permit safe starting and stopping. Relying on inserting batteries or 
twisting wires together to start is not allowed. If more than one motor is used, they may be combined on 
the same switch or wired on separate switches. 
f.	 Electrical components shall be limited to batteries, wires, manually-operated switches, resistors, 
potentiometers, capacitors, and up to two motors (including brushless motors). Integrated circuits (other 
than those that are an integral part of a commercial motor) are not permitted.
g.	 For timing and measurement purposes, the vehicle must have a 1/4” or larger wooden dowel vertically 
attached within 3.0 cm of its front edge such that the top end is at least 20.0 cm above the track’s surface 
when levitated. The dowel must be placed on the hovercraft so that it will be the first part of the vehicle 
to break a laser timing beam when the vehicle is traveling forward.
4.	 THE COMPETITION:  
a.	 Once participants enter the event area to compete, they must not leave or receive outside assistance, 
materials, or communication until they are finished competing.
b.	 Vehicles violating rules 3.c., 3.d., or 3.e. or that are otherwise deemed unsafe in construction or operation 
by the Event Supervisor will not be allowed to run unless brought into compliance. If the team is unable 
to bring the vehicle into compliance with 3.c., 3.d. and 3.e., the vehicle will not run and will receive 
a Final Score of zero (0). The Event Supervisor must complete the entire construction check on 
the vehicle to determine the total number of construction violations (which is used to break ties).
c.	 Event Supervisors will check the vehicle specifications before the team’s testing period. Teams must 
be notified as soon as possible if a vehicle is out of spec. Teams may modify the vehicle to bring it into 
compliance during their testing period.

©2026 - C42
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
HOVERCRAFT C (CONT.)
d.	 At the start of their testing period, each team will be given a Target Time (TT). The Target Time will 
be between 6.0-26.0 seconds in intervals of 2.0 seconds for Regionals, 1.0 second for States, and 0.5 
seconds for Nationals. The TT will be the same for all teams.
e.	 Teams have a testing period of 8 minutes to adjust and repair their vehicle and make their test runs. 
Practice runs are not allowed. If a team has 3 incomplete runs, their testing period is over. Once a 
team has one complete run, the team is allowed only one more run (the Final Run), regardless of 
the result of that run or whether the team has fewer than 3 incomplete runs. 
f.	 An incomplete run occurs if a vehicle fails to move for 3 seconds before crossing the finish line or the 
dowel fails to cross the finish line within (2 x TT) seconds. Teams are not allowed to declare a run as 
incomplete.
g.	 If the vehicle’s dowel does not cross the starting line within 3 seconds of launching, it does not count as 
a run (either complete or incomplete) and teams may reset. A run will be counted in the scoring as long 
as it is started before the 8-minute period has elapsed.
h.	 If any part of the vehicle falls off during a run, the team incurs a competition penalty for the run.
i.	 To begin a run, the team will place their vehicle on the track fully behind the start line against a wood 
block provided by and placed by the Event Supervisor. The team then activates their vehicle’s motor(s).
j.	 If they choose, teams may utilize an Event Supervisor-provided ramp (as described in 6.e.) for the 
launching of their vehicle. In such cases, the Event Supervisor will place the ramp in the same position 
for all teams. Using the ramp will impact the team’s score (7.c.iii.), and the time for placing the ramp will 
come out of the 8-minute period. The team may change this decision for each run.
k.	 The team will give a countdown of “3, 2, 1, launch”; then the Event Supervisor will remove the wood 
block. Timing starts when the vehicle’s dowel crosses the start line and stops when the dowel crosses the 
finish line. If photogates are used, the dowel must be the first part of the vehicle to break the laser beams 
at both the start and finish lines. 
l.	 The team must not touch their vehicle after the dowel crosses the starting line until the Event Supervisor 
states they may do so. If touched, the run is counted as a complete run with a DS and a TS of 0.
m.	If a run is declared incomplete, the Event Supervisor will place the starting block in front of the 
hovercraft at the point where the run was declared incomplete to prevent the vehicle from moving. 
The ES will ask the competitors to turn off their vehicle without moving it, and the ES will then 
record the distance from the finish line to the position of the dowel. The team’s testing period time will 
halt while the Event Supervisor makes measurements and will resume when the measurement time is 
done.
n.	 If the team’s run time on their first complete run is within 25% of the TT (to the precision of the 
time-keeping device), the team may request that their Final Run be for bonus points. Before the 
team makes that decision, the Event Supervisor will give the team the Bonus Target Time (BTT) 
for their consideration. The BTT must be different from the TT for that run. The Bonus Target 
Time (BTT) is subject to the same parameters as listed in 5.d. and will be the same for all teams. 
Teams may not use the ramp for a Bonus Run.
o.	 The Event Supervisor will review with the team the data recorded on their scoresheet.
p.	 A team filing an appeal must leave their vehicle in the competition area.
5.	 THE TRACK:
a.	 The Event Supervisor will supply a 45.0 ± 0.5 cm wide and at least 240 cm long track on a non-carpeted 
smooth floor or other firm smooth base surface, such as a countertop or large board. The outside boundary 
of the track is composed of rails each with a height at least 30.0 mm (standard 2x4 framing studs or 
steel framing studs recommended). The Event Supervisor will also supply a cushioned barrier to stop 
vehicles and a wood block to hold the vehicle at the start line. Example setups are at www.soinc.org.

©2026 - C43
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
b.	 Each rail must be securely affixed to the floor, base, or each other.
c.	 The length of the timed portion of the track is fixed at 185.0 ± 0.5 cm. A start line must be marked that is 
at least 45.0 cm from the end of the track. The finish line must be marked 185.0 ± 0.5 cm from the start 
line and a cushioned barrier at least 5.0 cm past it must block the channel.
d.	 A photogate timing system is highly recommended. If used, the system will be installed at the start and 
finish lines with the beams at a height of 17.0 ± 2.0 cm. At least one manual timer should be used as 
a backup. If photogates are not being used, three timekeepers should be utilized with the median time 
used as the official Run Time; lasers are recommended to be placed at the start and finish lines so the 
timekeepers only have to watch for the flash of light as the dowel cuts through the laser beam. Time is 
recorded in seconds to the device precision if photogates are used, or to the tenth of a second if manual 
timers are used.
e.	 The Event Supervisor must provide a removable ramp that competitors may use for the launching of their 
vehicle. The ramp should have a smooth, 
flat surface and must span the width of the 
track between the rails. The height of the 
ramp is 5.0 ± 0.5 cm and the length of the 
ramp’s surface is 41.0 ± 0.5 cm. When the 
ramp is placed on the track, the edge where 
the vehicle exits the ramp must be 4.0 ± 
0.5 cm behind the start line. At the bottom 
of the ramp, where it meets the track surface, the transition should be reasonably smooth, with a drop-off 
from the ramp surface to the track surface of no more than 4.0 mm. See www.soinc.org for information 
on how to build a ramp and track.
f.	 Multiple tracks may be used to facilitate teams competing in a timely manner.
6.	 SCORING: 
a.	 Final Score (FS) = Best Run Score + BS (if any). High score wins. A scoring spreadsheet is available 
at www.soinc.org.
b.	 Run Score = DS + TS
c.	 Distance Score (DS):
i.	
Complete Run: Distance Score = 30
ii.	 Incomplete Run: Distance Score = 30 x (185 - (distance from the finish line in cm)) / 185
iii.	 If the ramp is utilized, the Distance Score is multiplied by 0.5 for that run.
d.	 Time Score (TS):
i.	
Runtime = Time from the Vehicle dowel crossing the start line until the dowel crosses the finish 
line
ii.	 Complete Run: Time Score = 60 x (1 - abs(Runtime - TT)/TT)
iii.	 Incomplete Run: Time Score = 0
iv.	 The smallest possible Time Score is 0.
e.	 Bonus Score (BS) = 15 x (1 - 1.5 x abs(Final Run runtime - BTT)/BTT)
i.	
The smallest possible Bonus Score (BS) is 0.
ii.	 If the vehicle does not cross the finish line on the bonus run, the Bonus Score (BS) is 0.
f.	 Teams without any runs will receive a Final Score of 0, with ties broken as indicated in 7.j. Ties are 
possible.
g.	 The TS, DS, and BS for each run will be multiplied by 0.7 if the team misses impound.
h.	 The TS, DS, and BS for a run will be multiplied by 0.8 for each CONSTRUCTION violation present 
during that run.
i.	 The TS, DS, and BS for a run will be multiplied by 0.9 for each COMPETITION violation present 
during that run.
j.	 Tiebreakers: 1st – Best TS for the first complete run; 2nd – Fewest # Construction Violations; 3rd – 
Best BS, 4th - 2nd Best Run Score
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
HOVERCRAFT C (CONT.)

©2026 - C44
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Teams will construct a lever-based measuring device prior to the tournament to determine 
the mass ratios between three test masses and complete a written test on simple and compound machine 
concepts.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2           	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class III
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Each team may bring a collection of notes and resources, written/printed on paper, of any size containing 
information in any form and from any source. Binders, notebooks, folders, sheet protectors, lamination, 
tabs, and labels are permitted. Participants are responsible for organizing and containing their notes 
efficiently. They may separate or remove the pages from containers for use during any part of the event.
b.	 Each team may also bring non-electronic tools and supplies, writing utensils, and two Class III calculators 
for use during any part of the event. 
c.	 Each team may bring one pre-constructed device.
d.	 The Event Supervisors will provide the testing materials listed in the COMPETITION AREA section. 
Teams should not bring these materials. 
e.	 Participants must be able to answer questions regarding the design, construction, and operation of the 
device per the Building Policy found on www.soinc.org.
3.	 CONSTRUCTION PARAMETERS:
a.	 The device must be a class 1 lever connected directly via a flexible or rigid link to a class 2 or 3 lever, 
each with a single “beam” of length that measures no longer than 40.0 cm. The “beam” is the bar that 
rests on the fulcrum and includes any attached components, except the flexible or rigid link between the 
two levers. Its length should be measured along the overall longest edge of the beam and is measured 
irrespective of the location of the test mass attachment points. It is measured without the supervisor-
provided test masses attached.
b.	 Springs, electric components, and electronic components are prohibited.
c.	 The device must be constructed to accommodate the test masses as described in the COMPETITION 
AREA.
d.	 Participants must not bring masses or include them in their device except when fixed in place prior to 
testing to obtain static equilibrium. Lightweight adjustable hooks that may be moved along the beam and 
are used solely to accommodate the test masses are allowed and need not be fixed in place.
4.	 COMPETITION AREA:
a.	 The Event Supervisor will provide the testing materials listed below. The Event Supervisor must ensure 
that the mass measurements of the test masses and the ratios between those mass measurements are not 
revealed to any teams. 
b.	 Event Supervisors will supply three test masses labeled A, B, and C. A flexible loop, large enough to 
pass a standard golf ball through, must be tied to the top of each test mass. The loops may be made from 
fishing line, zip ties, string, etc. Each test mass, including the fully stretched out flexible loop, must be 
able to fit inside a 15.0 cm x 15.0 cm x 20.0 cm box. Each test mass, including the loop and container, 
must be between 20.0 g and 800.0 g. The ratio of the heaviest test mass to the lightest test mass must not 
exceed the following limits:
Regionals
States
Nationals
8.0
10.0
12.0
c.	 The event supervisor may provide multiple testing stations, each with its own sets of test masses.  The 
mass ratios between the test masses at each station must be identical to the precision that the Event 
Supervisor indicates in 5.II.g. The actual mass measurements of A, B, and C at each station must be 
roughly identical. 
d.	 An example where the Event Supervisor uses multiple stations and asks for a precision in the submitted 
ratios of one decimal point:
i.	
Station 1: B1 has a mass of 300.0 g, A1 has a mass of 100.0 g. B1/A1 = 3.0
ii.	 Allowed at Station 2:
(1)	B2 has a mass of 300.5, A2 has a mass of 99.8g. 
(2)	B1/A1 = B2/A2 = 3.0 to the correct precision = Identical mass ratios. The actual masses are 
roughly identical. So this is allowed in 4.c.
MACHINES C

©2026 - C45
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
iii.	 Disallowed at Station 2:
(1)	B2 has a mass of 600.0 g, A2 has a mass of 200.0 g. 
(2)	B1/A1 = B2/A2 = 3.0 = Identical mass ratios. However, the actual masses are not roughly 
identical. This is not allowed in 4.c.
5.	 THE COMPETITION:
Part I: Written Test
a.	 Teams will be given a minimum of 25 minutes to complete a written test.
b.	 Unless otherwise requested, answers must be in metric units with appropriate significant figures.
c.	 The written test will consist of questions about simple and compound machines in static equilibrium and 
include questions from each of the following topics as they apply to simple/compound machines: 
i.	
Ideal and actual mechanical advantage
ii.	 Efficiency, load, and effort 
iii.	 Potential and kinetic energy 
iv.	 Coefficient of friction
v.	
Self-locking machines
vi.	 Angle of repose
vii.	 States/Nationals Only: Simple and compound machines that are not in equilibrium.
d.	 At least six of the following simple machines must appear in questions: First class levers, second class 
levers, third class levers, inclined planes, wedges, wheel and axle (including gears), pulleys (including 
rope and pulley systems), and screws.
e.	 Questions dealing with the topics listed above may require additional knowledge from the field of 
classical Newtonian mechanics, including Newton’s laws of motion, inertia, force, action-reaction, 
position, speed, velocity, acceleration, momentum, kinetic and potential energy, and conservation of 
energy and momentum.
f.	 Questions on the test will use the following mathematical content:
i.	
Basic 2D geometry required for resolving forces into component parts. For example, parallel & 
perpendicular lines, triangles (right, similar, & congruent).
ii.	 Algebraic manipulations of multiple steps. 
iii.	 Basic trigonometry and vectors.
iv.	 No questions may require the use of calculus. 
Part II: Device Testing
a.	 The objective is to quickly determine the ratios of the unknown masses of the three test masses using 
their compound lever. Teams may not submit a ratio guess that is based on visual inspection or hefting 
the test masses in their hands; teams must use their lever to make an honest attempt to measure the ratio. 
Otherwise teams will receive zero (0) ratio and time scores.
b.	 While all teams are working on Part I, the Event Supervisor will individually call each team for Device 
Setup and Testing. Depending on the room’s space, this may be done where the team is working on their 
written test or at a separate station in the room. If possible, students should not be asked to move their 
devices after Setup. Multiple stations may be used subject to the limitations in 4.c. 
c.	 When called, teams will begin their Setup Time (Regional - 5 minutes, States/National - 4 minutes). 
Their Setup Time includes unpacking, assembly, and calibration of the device. The Event Supervisor will 
pause the time to check the device specifications after the device is assembled. Teams must be notified 
as soon as possible if a device does not meet specifications. 
d.	 Teams may modify the device to bring it into compliance with construction specifications during their 
Setup Time, but will receive no additional time for setup. 
i.	
If teams have brought a beam that is too long, they may measure out an “allowed beam length” and 
mark it with Event Supervisor-provided masking tape. The “allowed beam length” must meet the 
construction specifications in Section 3 and must include the fulcrum, means and space to attach the 
Event Supervisor-provided test masses, any fixed masses, and the attachment of the link between 
the two levers. Teams may then test without penalty using only the “allowed” part of their beam.
ii.	 If teams bring movable masses (in violation of 3.d.), they may, without penalty, fix them in place 
with the masking tape.
iii.	 Modifications of the device, other than those listed here, may be performed during Setup.
MACHINES C (CONT.)

©2026 - C46
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
iv.	 The Event Supervisor does not pause the Setup Time for a construction re-check if the team has to fix 
construction parameters. If teams cannot bring their device into compliance with the Construction 
Parameters by the end of their Setup Time, the team may elect to reduce their allowed time in their 
Device Test time to continue to address the issue(s).
e.	 Teams will be given 4 minutes of Device Test time, minus any overage time from Setup, to calculate 
their mass ratios. Teams must not touch the test masses until handed them by the Event Supervisor. Test 
masses must not be handed to teams until their device is brought into specification.
f.	 Using the basic physical principles of a lever and adjusting only the relative positions of the test masses 
and/or fulcrums along the lever beams, teams must calculate the ratios of the masses of the test masses. 
Teams may work with either two or three test masses at a time. Teams may use their resources, calculators, 
and tools to determine the mass ratios.  
g.	 Teams will submit their mass ratios in decimal form (ex. a ratio of 5:2 should be written as 2.5). The 
Event Supervisor will inform teams of the precision to which the team should give their answers. The 
Event Supervisor will also inform teams what action makes their ratios “submitted” for the time to stop 
(for example, writing the second ratio down on the scoresheet, announcing that their answers are final, 
ringing a bell, etc).
h.	 Teams must not mark on, attach anything to, or modify the test masses.
i.	 Part II timing stops when the team submits the calculated mass ratios A/B and B/C or their Device 
Testing Time has elapsed. Event Supervisors must record the elapsed time in seconds to the nearest tenth 
of a second. No changes are allowed to the calculated values once timing stops.
j.	 The Supervisor will review with the team the Part II data recorded on their scoresheet.
k.	 Teams filing an appeal regarding Part II must leave their device in the competition area.
6.	 SCORING:
a.	 High score wins; Final Score (FS) = ES + R1 + R2 + TS. The maximum possible FS is 100 points. A 
scoring spreadsheet is available at www.soinc.org.
b.	 Exam Score (ES) = (Part I score / Highest Part I score for all teams) x 45 points.
c.	 Time Score (TS) = ((240 - team’s part II time in seconds) / 240) x 15 points.
d.	 Ratio Scores (R1 and R2) = (1 - (abs(AR - MR) / AR)) x 20 points. 
i.	
AR is the actual ratio of two of the test masses.
ii.	 MR is the measured value of the ratio as submitted by the team.
iii.	 R1 uses mass ratio A/B, R2 uses mass ratio B/C.
iv.	 The smallest possible R1 and R2 is 0.
e.	 If a team violates a COMPETITION rule, their TS, R1, and R2 scores will be multiplied by 0.9.
f.	 Teams with no device, no ratio estimates, whose device cannot meet construction specifications, or that 
do not make an honest attempt to utilize a device of the prescribed type to determine the mass ratios 
receive R1, R2, and TS of 0. Such teams will be allowed to compete in Part I (the written test).
g.	 Tiebreakers: 1st - Best ES; 2nd - Best TS; 3rd - Best R1; 4th - Selected test questions.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
MACHINES C (CONT.)

©2026 - C47
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Teams will complete lab activities and answer a series of questions related to the materials 
science of nanomaterials with an emphasis on chemical, physical, optical, and mechanical properties of 
nanomaterials.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes 
EYE PROTECTION: C	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class III 
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Each participant may bring one 8.5” x 11” sheet of paper, which may be in a sheet protector sealed by 
tape or laminated, that may contain information on both sides in any form and from any source without 
any affixed labels.
b.	 Each participant must bring a writing implement and may bring a class III calculator.
c.	 Teams should bring any or all of the items listed on the Division C Chemistry Events Lab Equipment List, 
posted on soinc.org. Teams not bringing these items will be at a disadvantage, as they are not provided.
d.	 Participants must wear goggles, an apron or a lab coat and have skin covered from the neck down to the 
wrist and toes. Gloves are optional, but if the host requires a specific type they will notify teams. Pants 
should be loose fitting; if the host has more specific guidelines, they will notify teams in advance of the 
tournament. Shoulder length or longer hair must be tied back. Participants removing safety clothing/ 
goggles or unsafely handling materials, or equipment will be penalized or disqualified.
e.	 Supervisors will provide any required reagents, additional glassware, and/or references that are needed 
for the tasks (e.g., Periodic Table, table of standard reduction potentials, any constants needed).
3.	 THE COMPETITION:
Part 1: Lab Activity
a.	 At least one lab activity must be performed. Refer to soinc.org for a list of core competencies for 
chemistry events. Topics for lab activities shall be consistent with topics listed under Part 2: Written Test
b.	 Lab Activities will comprise at least 15% of the total score at the Regional Level, 25% at the State Level, 
and 35% at the National Level.
Part 2: Written Test
a.	 The written test will focus on the chemical structure, crystalline structure, characterization, performance, 
synthesis, processing and applications of nanomaterials.
b.	 Types and applications of nanomaterials: Metal nanomaterial, metal-oxide nanomaterials, ceramic 
nanomaterials, semiconductor nanomaterials, carbon-based nanomaterials (graphene, fullerenes, 
nanotubes, etc); zero dimensional, one dimensional, two dimensional, and three-dimensional 
nanomaterials; nanofluids. Uses of the types of nanomaterials. The following nanomaterials are NOT 
included: polymer nanomaterials, organic nanomaterials.
c.	 Structure: Crystalline structure, amorphous nanomaterials, interatomic bonding, intermolecular forces, 
size effects of nanomaterials, Grain boundaries. State and National levels only may include: Diffusion, 
crystalline defects.
d.	 Chemistry of surfaces: Surface area/volume ratio, surface energy, surface tension, wetting angle, 
hydrophobicity, hydrophilicity, surfactants.
e.	 Nanomaterials synthesis and fabrication: Top-down synthesis techniques (e.g., milling, sputtering, 
chemical etching, lithography, etc.) and Bottom-up synthesis techniques (e.g., sol-gel process, chemical 
vapor deposition, self-assembly, molecular beam epitaxy, etc.)
f.	 Characterization: X-ray diffraction, light and electron microscopes, scanning probe microscopy, 
spectroscopes (e.g., UV-visible, photoluminescence, energy dispersive, mass, etc.)
g.	 Physical & Mechanical properties: Melting temperature, density, hardness, strength, elastic modulus, 
calculation of stress, strain, and elastic modulus, adhesion, wear. 
h.	 Optical properties: Scattering, absorption, color, reflection, refraction, transmission. State and National 
levels only may include Luminescence, fluorescence, plasmons, quantum confinement effects on optical 
properties.
i.	 Thermal, Electrical, & Magnetic properties: Thermal conductivity, Electrical conductivity, electronic 
band structure, surface scattering, dielectric properties, semiconductor behavior. State and National 
levels only may include Magnetic fields, saturation magnetization, types of magnetism in nanomaterials, 
quantum confinement effects on electrical properties.
MATERIALS SCIENCE C

©2026 - C48
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
4.	 SCORING: High score wins. 
a.	 Lab Activities (at least 15% at Regional, 25% at State, and 35% at National)
b.	 Written Test (No more than 85% at Regional, 75% at State, and 65% at National)
c.	 Ties will be broken by pre-selected questions.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
MATERIALS SCIENCE C (CONT.)

©2026 - C49
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Participants will use remote sensing imagery, data, and computational process skills to 
complete tasks related to climate change processes in the Earth system.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class II
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Each team may bring one three-ring binder of any size containing information in any form and from any 
source attached using the available rings. Sheet protectors, lamination, tabs and labels are permitted. If 
the event features a rotation through a series of laboratory stations where the participants interact with 
samples, specimens, or displays; no material may be removed from the binder throughout the event.
b.	 Each team may bring two protractors, two rulers, and two Class II calculators.
3.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 The event will consist of questions and activities testing concepts related to the collection and use of 
remote sensing data to observe and study climate change processes and their effects on Earth systems.
b.	 The test should be divided so that approximately 25% focuses on topics under 3.c., 35% focuses on 
topics under 3.d., 20% focuses on topics under 3.e., and 20% focuses on topics under 3.f. Students 
should not be expected to know or use calculus to answer any questions.
c.	 Remote sensing instrumentation and physics.
i.	
Active vs. Passive sensors
ii.	 Optical and infrared imagers, radiometers, LIDAR, space-based gravimetry
iii.	 Radar Altimetry, precipitation radar, Doppler radar (ground, airborne, and satellite-based)
iv.	 Reflection, refraction, attenuation, transmission, and scattering of light by the atmosphere, aerosols, 
water, vegetation
v.	
Spectroscopy, including regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, basic types of spectra 
(continuous, emission, and absorption), usage in identifying composition (atmospheric gases, 
etc.)
vi.	 Characteristics of blackbody radiation (Wien’s Law, Stefan-Boltzmann Law, Rayleigh-Jeans Law)
vii.	 Orbital properties, including Kepler’s Laws, types of orbits (LEO, MEO, HEO, geosynchronous, 
geostationary, polar, sun-synchronous)
viii.	Imaging fidelity/quality, including satellite altitude or semi-major axis and angular resolution, 
instantaneous field of view, ground sample distance, field of view; revisit period vs. orbital 
period vs. framerate to cover a swath
d.	 Interpretation of images and datasets from only the listed satellites and instruments, as relevant to the 
topics of this event. Appropriate context (e.g. sensors, bands, etc.) should be provided as necessary 
for satellite imagery.
i.	
Optical, infrared, and Doppler radar imagery of clouds, precipitation, and extreme weather events 
(MODIS on Aqua, CALIPSO, CloudSat, GOES, Suomi NPP, GPM)
ii.	 Sea level rise and surface waves (PACE, JASON, GRACE)
iii.	 Distributions and radiative effects of greenhouse gases, trace atmospheric gases, and aerosols (OCO-
2, Aura, MODIS on Aqua, GOES, Suomi NPP, CALIPSO, PACE)
iv.	 Atmospheric and sea surface temperatures (MODIS on Aqua, ECOSTRESS, ATMS, GOES, CrIS 
on Suomi NPP)
v.	
Radiative energy flux (CERES on Suomi NPP, PACE)
e.	 Climate processes.
i.	
Atmospheric concentrations and distributions of greenhouse gases, trace gases, and aerosols (CO2, 
H2O, CH4, N2O, SO2, Ozone, CFCs, HFCs, NH3, Halogenated gas), and relevant influencing 
factors (e.g. solar activity, volcanic activity, Earth’s orbit and seasons, atmospheric and ocean 
circulation)
ii.	 El Niño-Southern Oscillation and its effects on regional climate
iii.	 Carbon cycle and Nitrogen cycle, the impacts of natural phenomena and anthropogenic activity on 
these cycles, and relevance of these cycles to climate processes
iv.	 The effects of climate change on existing weather processes (e.g. clouds and rainfall, flooding, 
sea level rise, heat waves, atmospheric effects of wildfires)
v.	
Ecological impacts, such as on vegetation and biome distributions
f.	 Energy balance modeling and climate change. 
REMOTE SENSING C - CLIMATE CHANGE

©2026 - C50
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
i.	
The effects of atmospheric and surface conditions (e.g. clouds, aerosols, surface albedo) on climate 
change, including radiative forcing and climate feedback loops
ii.	 Blackbody radiation (using the Stefan-Boltzmann Law) absorbed by the Earth from the Sun, and 
emitted from the Earth.
iii.	 Albedo-based reflection by surface, ice, and clouds
iv.	 Modeling planetary equilibrium temperature as a result of the interaction between incoming 
and outgoing radiation, and changes to equilibrium temperature due to atmospheric and surface 
conditions
v.	
Changes in heating and cooling rates over time using linear, piecewise-linear, and exponential 
functions
4.	 SCORING:
a.	 High score wins.
b.	 Points will be awarded for the quality and accuracy of responses.
c.	 Selected questions may be used as tiebreakers.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
This event is sponsored by the IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society (GRSS).
REMOTE SENSING C (CONT.)

©2026 - C51
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
ROBOT TOUR C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Teams design, build, program and test one Robotic Vehicle to navigate a track to reach a 
target at a set amount of time as accurately and efficiently as possible.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2 	
  	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 18 minutes
	
IMPOUND: Yes
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Device: One Robot designed, built, and programmed by the team prior to the competition.
b.	 Impound: Team must impound before the first time slot.
c.	 Event Time: Teams will have 18 minutes to set up and run their Robot.
d.	 Track: The Event Supervisor will provide and set up the Track as listed in the Track section.
3.	 CONSTRUCTION PARAMETERS:
a.	 Electrical Energy used by the Robot for any purpose must come from a maximum of eight (8) AA or 
AAA batteries.
i.	
No battery containing lithium or lead acid is permitted. Teams using these batteries will not be 
permitted to run and will receive only participation points.
b.	 Components may be purchased or made by the team members.  Electronic components are allowed.  
Multiple microprocessors are allowed.  Lasers are prohibited.
c.	 Robot Size: The entire Robot in the ready-to-run configuration must fit in any orientation in a 30.0 cm 
by 30.0 cm space.  No restriction on the Robot’s height.
d.	 Dowel: A dowel must be attached to the front of the Robot.  The dowel must be approximately 
perpendicular to the floor, extend to within 1.0 cm of the track surface, and extend at least 10.0 cm above 
the floor.  The dowel does not need to be the foremost part of the robot.  The dowel must be easily 
accessible by the ES as the front bottom edge of the dowel will be used as the Measurement Point (MP).  
The dowel may not rotate, pivot, extend, or move around the Robot.
e.	 Robot Program: The impounded program can be one or multiple source code files.
f.	 Sensors: Teams may use sensors to provide information about the environment or the Robot’s movements.  
Sensors must be attached and connected to the Robot.  Sensors may change their orientation during a run. 
For example a motor may rotate a sensor.
g.	 Robot Parts: All parts of the Robot must move as a whole; no tethers other separate pieces are allowed.  
The Robot cannot change in size during the run.  Pieces cannot fall off during the run.  This rule will 
be judged during the run and violations will be awarded as a Construction Violation.
h.	 Design Knowledge: Answer questions on design, construction, and operation of the device per the 
Building Policy found on www.soinc.org.
4.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 Impound before first time slot.
i.	
Teams must impound one Robot, batteries, spare parts and any papers (if used).
ii.	 Batteries must be stored separately from Robot and presented to ES for inspection if asked.
iii.	 The Robot’s program source code(s) must be impounded using the following storage media but not 
limited to these options: USB drive, SD card, Robot’s flash memory.
iv.	 Laptops, tables, or other computers used for programming CANNOT be impounded.
v.	
Tools do not need to be impounded.
vi.	 Inspections will NOT take place during impound as any of the 15 member team may impound.
b.	 After Impound and before the first time slot, the Target Time and the locations of the Start Point, Target 
Point, Obstacles, Gates Zones, and Water Bottles will be announced and posted.  The Track Setup at a 
competition will be the same for all teams.
i.	
The number of Gate Zones will be 4 for Regionals, 5 for States, and 6 for Nationals.
ii.	 The number of Water Bottles will be 3 for Regionals, 4 for States, and 5 for Nationals.
iii.	 The Target Time will be:
(1)	For Invitationals & Regionals between 60 and 80 seconds.
(2)	For States between 55 and 75 seconds.
(3)	For Nationals between 50 and 65 seconds.  
(4)	The interval will be 1.0 second for all tournaments.

©2026 - C52
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
c.	 Check-In
i.	
Only the participants will enter the event area.  If needed, they must bring their programming tools 
and may bring tools as defined.
ii.	 Teams will be instructed by the ES when to retrieve their impounded items.
iii.	 Teams will present their Robot for inspection & measurement by the ES.  Participants will be notified 
at this point if any construction violations are found.  
(1)	Teams may use their Setup Time and Track Time to correct any construction violations.  A 
team’s time will be paused during re-evaluation by the ES.
iv.	 Once participants start the Check-In process, they must not leave or gain any outside assistance or 
materials until their Event Time is completed.
v.	
Teams must follow the defined Program Restrictions during their Event Time.
vi.	 At the Event Supervisor’s discretion, participants may use an AC outlet power during their time slot 
but this may depend on the event location.
vii.	 Unauthorized, generative AI tools (e.g., ChatGPT, DALL-E) are not allowed to be used to generate 
answers/code under any circumstances during the event.
d.	 Setup Time
i.	
Teams are given a Setup Time to determine the Robot’s path and make any programming changes.  
The Setup Time starts after the completion of the inspections and the ES verifies competitors have 
only opened their impounded program.
(1)	Setup Time is up to 10 minutes and takes place away from the track area.  
(2)	It is recommended that the ES provide a paper copy of the track setup to avoid too many 
competitors in the track area.  Teams are not permitted to write on ES supplied paper.
(3)	Teams may make physical modifications to the Robot.  Batteries may be installed.
(4)	Participants may modify only their impounded program and transfer to the Robot.
(5)	Participants are not permitted to test their Robot’s movements on any surface.  The Robot may 
only be tested provided the Robot is held by the competitors away from any surface and held 
stationary.
e.	 Track Time
i.	
Teams are given Track Time to run their Robot and make any required changes.
ii.	 Teams may choose before starting their Track Time to compete without the 2x4 Obstacles for a 
penalty less than the Contact Penalty.  All runs must be attempted with or without the 2x4 Obstacles.  
Teams cannot change their decision once their Track Time begins.
iii.	 The Track Time ends after any of these are reached: 2 Successful Runs, 2 Failed Runs, or time limit 
has been reached.
(1)	Track Time length is 8 minutes.
(2)	The ES will notify the participants when their Track Time starts.
(3)	If a run has started before the Track Time has elapsed, the Robot will be allowed to run to 
completion.
(4)	Track Time used will be recorded as a tiebreaker and will stop at the end of the team’s last run.
iv.	 Teams may use their own tools to measure any Track dimension or distance as part of their Track 
Time.  
v.	
With the ES approval and before any run, Teams may adjust the 2x4 Obstacle and Water 
Bottle locations as part of their Track Time.  This action can only fine tune the location and 
not re-locate the objects.
vi.	 Alignment or sighting devices are permitted and may be electric or electronic.  These devices must 
be used only within the Track Area and removed from the Track Area before the start of the 
run.  Lasers are prohibited.  
vii.	 Teams may clean the Track during their Track Time, but it must remain dry.
viii.	Teams cannot test their device on the floor of the Track on the day of the event. Their next Successful 
Run will receive a competition violation.
ix.	 Teams may calibrate sensors during their Track Time provided the Robot does not move.
x.	 Individual Run Testing
(1)	Participants must place the Robot’s dowel above the Start Point.
(2)	The Robot may be placed in any orientation.  If the Robot is starting from outside the Track, 
then the Robot’s first movement must be to enter the Track area.
ROBOT TOUR C (CONT.)

©2026 - C53
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
ROBOT TOUR C (CONT.)
(3)	The Robot must be able to remain at the starting position without being touched until 
triggered.
(4)	Participants will notify the ES when ready to start the run.  At which point the ES will pause 
the Track Time and review the Robot in the Ready-To-Run configuration for any violations.  
(a)	The ES will only notify the participants of any competition violations at the end of each 
run.  Teams may ask question(s) before the run if there are specific violations.  The ES 
will not answer generic questions like “Do I have a violation?”
(5)	For each run, teams may choose to compete with or without all the Water Bottles on the 
track.  There is no penalty for competing without the Water Bottles.
(6)	The Track Time will be restarted once ES is ready and the participants are notified to start the 
run.
(7)	Participants must activate a Trigger on the Robot to start the run.  Competitors must use an 
unsharpened #2 pencil supplied by the ES to actuate the Trigger.  Only the pencil may contact 
the Robot while actuating the Trigger.
(a)	If the Robot fails to actuate or move when triggered, then a run has not occurred. The Robot 
must move to be a measurable run.  The participants may continue to work on their device 
provided they have not reached the end of their Track Time.
(8)	Once the run starts and until the Robot is retrieved, competitors may not use, view, or 
access their programming tool(s).
(9)	ES will record the following items during the run:
(a)	Gate Zones as entered.  Only the first entrance will be recorded.  See Entering Gate Zone.
(b)	Water Bottles moved to Gate Zones.  See Moving Water Bottle Restrictions.
(c)	Any contact with a 2x4 obstacle.
(d)	If a Stalling Action has occurred.
(10)	Track Time is paused at the end of run.
(11)	ES will review the run to determine if the run was Successful or a Failed Run (See 
Definitions).
(12)	Run Time and Vehicle Distance will be measured and recorded for Successful runs.
(13)	Any violations will be recorded.  See Run Penalties under Scoring.  The ES must notify the 
participants of any violations at the end of each run.
(14)	Track Time will resume once the participants pick up their device or begin working.  Unless 
their Track Time has ended.
xi.	 The Event Supervisor will review with teams their data recorded. 
xii.	 Teams filing an appeal must leave their Robot and other impounded material in the event area.
5.	 SCORING:
a.	 Low score wins. Each team’s Final Score is their lowest Run Score plus any Final Score Penalties.
b.	 The Run Score for each run
i.	
Successful Run = 200 + Time Score + Distance Score + Bonuses + Run Penalties
ii.	 Failed Run = 1000 points + Run Penalties
c.	 The Time Score is determined by:
i.	
Run Time less than Target Time:	 	
	
Time Score = (Target Time - Run Time) x 2
ii.	 Run Time greater or equal to Target Time:	
Time Score = (Run Time - Target Time)
d.	 Distance Score = 2.0 pt/cm x Robot Distance.
e.	 Gate Bonus = -15 points for each Gate Zone entered in any order.  Gates are only counted once per run.
f.	 Water Bottle Bonus = -15 points for each Water Bottle moved into a Gate Zone. 
i.	
The Water Bottle must be completely within the Gate Zone border and upright.
ii.	 If multiple Water Bottles are within the same Gate Zone, only one Water Bottle will be counted.
iii.	 The bonus is awarded at the end of the run and not when a Bottle is moved into a Gate Zone.
g.	 Track Time Bonus (National Only) = (Track Time Used - 550) / 30 points 
i.	
Tournament Directors may choose to add this bonus with advance notice.
h.	 Run Penalties:
i.	
Contact Penalty: 70 points added to each Run Score where Robot or Bottle makes 1 or more 
contacts with the 2x4 Obstacles.
ii.	 No 2x4 Obstacle Penalty: 50 points added to all Run Scores when a team chooses to run with the 
2x4 Obstacles.

©2026 - C54
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
ROBOT TOUR C (CONT.)
iii.	 Stalling Penalty: 20 points added to each Run Score with a Stalling Action.
iv.	 Competition Violation: 150 points added to the Run Score that has 1 or more Competition Violations.
v.	
Construction Violation: 300 points added to the Run Score that has 1 or more Construction Violations.
vi.	 Failed Runs can also be assessed Competition and/or Construction violations.
i.	 Bonuses and penalties are awarded independent of each other.  For example, a run score can have both 
the Gate Zone Bonus and the 2x4 Obstacle Penalty.
j.	 Final Score Penalties: 
i.	
Robot’s movements tested during Setup Time: 200 points added to the team’s Final Score.
ii.	 Robot or Program Not Impounded: 1500 points added to the team’s Final Score.
k.	 Ties must be broken by this sequence:
i.	
Lower Time Score on scored run
ii.	 Lower Robot Distance on scored run
iii.	 Higher number of Gate Zones entered on scored run
iv.	 Lower Track Time used
6.	 SCORING EXAMPLES:
a.	 At a competition, the track has 4 Gates (A, B, C & D).  Target Time is 73 seconds.  A team’s Robot 
stopped 21.7 cm from the Target Point with a Run Time of 62.53 sec.  Gate Zones were entered in the 
following order “C”, “D”, and “A”.  Two (2) Water Bottles were moved into Gate Zones.  The team had 
a recorded Track Time of 7 minutes and 35 seconds. 
Base Score
= 200
=
200.00
Time Score
= (73 - 62.53) x 2
=
20.94
Distance Score
= 21.7cm x 2.0 pts/cm
=
43.40
Gate Bonus
= 3 Gates x -15 pts/Gate
=
-45.00
Water Bottle Bonus
= 2 Bottles x -15 pts/Bottle
=
-30.00
Run Score
=
189.34
7.	 THE TRACK:
a.	 In-Person tournaments: The ES will supply and set up the Track.
b.	 Virtual tournaments:  Team will supply the Track that fully complies with the requirements of this 
section.  Any deviation will be scored as a competition violation for all runs.
c.	 Track Definition:
i.	
The track area will be a 2 meter by 2.5 meter square area on a smooth, level, and hard surface.
ii.	 The Outer Boundary Lines of the Track will be defined using the inside edge 2.5 cm wide tape.
iii.	 The outside tape lines will be marked every 0.5 m or 50 cm for the imaginary lines within the track 
area. There are three (3) imaginary lines in the vertical direction and four (4) imaginary lines in 
the horizontal directions for a total of seven (7) lines. All imaginary lines are perpendicular to the 
outside tape lines. The imaginary lines will form twenty (20) square zones (approximately 50 cm 
x 50 cm) within the track area. It is recommended to use ¼” wide tape to mark all imaginary lines, 
but not required.
iv.	 The Start Point will be marked on the inside edge of the outer boundary tape line. The Start Point 
will be centered between any imaginary line and/or a perpendicular outer boundary tape line.
v.	
The Target Point will be in the center of one of the twenty (20) zones defined by the imaginary lines 
and outer tape lines. The Target Point will be marked on approximately 2.5 cm x 2.5 cm tape with 
the Target Point marked at the center of the tape.
vi.	 Up to ten (10) wooden 2x4 Obstacles are placed on the tracklines. The 2x4 can be placed on 
any imaginary line or outside tape lines. The 2x4s are placed approximately centered between 
adjacent perpendicular track lines (outside or imaginary).  The dimensions of the 2x4 obstacles are 
approximately 1.5 inches by 3.5 inches by 16 inches long. 
vii.	 Bonus Gate Zones will be marked by 2.5 cm tape lines unless the imaginary lines are marked by 
tape. Each Gate Zone is approximately 50 cm by 50 cm square.  The tape will be placed on the inside 
edge of the imaginary lines and/or the outer tape line to form the Gate Zone. The ES will select the 
locations of the Gate Zones.  Each Gate Zone will be marked with a letter (Ex: “A”, “B”, “C”, ”D”, 
…). 

©2026 - C55
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
viii.	Water Bottles are placed on any imaginary line and approximately centered between 
perpendicular imaginary lines or outside boundary tape.  The ES will select the locations of 
the Water Bottles.
ix.	 The Track Setup must contain a clear path that is free of 2x4 Obstacles to enter all Gate Zones, for 
the movement of Water Bottles to a Gate Zone, and reach the Target Point.  A clear path would 
allow a Robot to achieve all the event goals and bonuses while the Robot remains completely 
inside the track boundary.
x.	 The color of the tape used to mark the track is the choice of the Event Supervisor.
xi.	 At the Event Supervisor’s discretion, more than one track may be used. If so, the team may choose 
which track they use. All runs must be on the same track.
8.	 DEFINITIONS:
a.	 Event Supervisor (ES) is responsible for ensuring the event runs correctly.  The ES can assign one or 
more event helpers to perform various competition tasks.
b.	 Batteries are commercial batteries, including rechargeables, labeled as AA or AAA batteries.  Individual 
batteries must have a voltage between 1.2 and 1.5 volts when fully charged.  The battery label must 
be the manufacturer’s original label and easily viewable by the ES.  The batteries must be individual 
batteries and removable from a battery pack.  Batteries containing lithium or lead are prohibited.
c.	 Dowels are defined as a wooden rod with a base dimension of approximately ¼” to ⅜”.  Round or 
square dowels are acceptable.  Similar components such as pencils are allowed provided the required 
dimensions are met.
d.	 Electronic components can be, but not limited to, solid-state devices such as transistors, integrated 
circuits, diodes, and microprocessors. 
e.	 Tools may be electric and electronic tools.  To qualify as a Tool, the item must not travel on the Track 
with the Robot and cannot be used to align or aim the Robot.
f.	 Spare Parts are items that could travel as part of the Robot during a run.  These must be impounded.
ROBOT TOUR C (CONT.)

©2026 - C56
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
g.	 Source Code File(s) is a file(s) containing programming statements in a computer programming language 
that are modified by a text editor or Integrated Development Environment (IDE) tool.
h.	 Programming Tool may be, but not limited to, a laptop, tablet, or Chromebook.
i.	 Program Restrictions are defined as:
i.	
Teams may access the Internet to program their Robot.  Any actions not required for 
programming will cause a team to be awarded a competition violation.  Internet access may 
not be available at all competitions.
ii.	 Competitors must demonstrate to the ES that they are only modifying the impounded source code 
file(s) to define the Robot’s motions.
iii.	 The Robot’s program can use libraries stored on the programming tool provided these libraries are 
not viewed or modified by the competitors during the event.
iv.	 Testing the Robot’s program on hardware other than the Robot is not permitted. Graphical software 
representations of the Track or the Robot’s motions are not permitted. Using software algorithms to 
modify the impounded program is not permitted.
v.	
An algorithm to find the optimal route is not allowed.  Competitors must do the work to 
determine the route the Robot will take.
vi.	 The Robot must remain autonomous and not be remotely controlled. The Robot cannot receive 
external instructions or information once a run starts.
j.	 Trigger may be, but not limited to, a pushbutton, power switch, micro switch, or a sensor.
k.	 Entering Gate Zone is when the Robot’s dowel has fully entered a Gate Zone.  The Robot may enter the 
Gate Zone forward, backwards, or sideways.  Gate Zones can be entered in any order.  Each Gate Zone 
will only be counted once.
l.	 Water Bottle is a 16.9 oz water bottle with a diameter between 6 and 7 cm and a height between 18 
and 22 cm.  The bottle’s weight will be between 80 to 100 grams.  Metal (non-lead) BBs or similar 
will be used to increase the bottle’s weight.  Liquids cannot be used.
m.	Moving Water Bottle Restrictions are defined as:
i.	
The Bottle must remain in contact with the event floor at all times.  No part of the Robot may 
extend under the Bottle.
ii.	 The Bottle may only be pushed or pulled around the track.
iii.	 The Robot cannot have a movable component with the intent to help relocate the Bottle. For 
example a gripper to grab or hold the Bottle is illegal.
n.	 Stalling Action is a delaying movement or series of movements near the Target Point with the intent to 
improve only the Time Score.  Possible delaying actions can include but are not limited to: repeating a 
single or multiple movements, moving in small circles, or other motions designed to improve the Time 
Score only.
i.	
Near the Target Point is defined as occurring within the 50 cm by 50 cm Target Point square or any 
square surrounding the square with the Target Point.
ii.	 Pauses between motions will not be penalized. Unless the motions between the pauses are repetitive 
as for example moving in a straight line with more than one pause during the straight line motion.
iii.	 Varying the speed of the Robot during a Run is allowed and is not a Stalling Action.
iv.	 An Event Supervisor may request the last run to be repeated to verify the presence of delaying 
movements. This repeat run will not count toward the team’s Track Time or used for scoring.
o.	 Robot Distance is a point-to-point measurement from the Robot’s Measurement Point to the Target 
Point, measured to the nearest 0.1 cm.
p.	 Run Time begins when the Robot begins to move and ends when the Robot comes to a complete stop. 
i.	
If the Robot does not move within 3 seconds after coming to a stop, the run is considered to have 
ended;  the 3 seconds are not included in the Run Time.  Any action occurring after that time does 
not count as part of the run.
ii.	 The Run Time is recorded in seconds to the precision of the timing device used.  
iii.	 Three timekeepers should be utilized with the middle time used as the official Run Time.
q.	 Successful Run: Any run when the Robot moves before the end of the Event Time and has not met one 
of the Failed Run conditions.
ROBOT TOUR C (CONT.)

©2026 - C57
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
r.	 Failed Run: A run will be scored as a Failed Run when one of the following occurs.  Construction and/
or Competition Violations must still be recorded for Failed Runs.
i.	
Competitors may ask to have the run recorded as a Failed Run. The Robot must be in motion to be 
declared as a Failed Run. If competitors declare a Failed Run during the 3 seconds of non-motion, 
the Robot must make another motion after the pause to be declared as a Failed Run.  Competitors 
may not collect information about where the Robot stopped.
ii.	 Does not finish within twice the Target Time.
iii.	 The Robot exits the track area as determined by all Robot floor contact points being completely 
outside of the Track’s outer perimeter lines.
iv.	 A competitor picks up the Robot after the Robot stops moving and before the ES gives permission 
to pick up the Robot. In addition, the team’s next successful run will receive a competition violation.
v.	
If the time and/or distance cannot be measured for a Robot (e.g., it starts before the ES is ready, the 
participants pick it up before it is measured).
vi.	 At the end of the Track Time, a team having less than 2 successful runs will have any remaining runs 
assessed as a Failed Run.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
ROBOT TOUR C (CONT.)

©2026 - C58
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
ROCKS AND MINERALS C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Teams will identify and classify rocks and minerals and demonstrate knowledge of how 
rocks and minerals help to understand geologic processes, interpretation of earth’s history, the development 
of natural resources, and use by society.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class II
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Each team may bring one (1) magnifying glass and one (1) three-ring binder of any size containing 
information in any form and from any source attached using the available rings. Sheet protectors, 
lamination, tabs and labels are permitted.
b.	 Each team may also have one (1) commercially produced field guide which may be tabbed and annotated.
c.	 In addition to a binder and a field guide, each team may bring one (1) copy of the 2026 National Rocks 
and Minerals List which does not have to be secured in the binder and may be annotated.
d.	 Each team may bring one (1) Class II calculator.
e.	 Teams are not permitted to bring samples or specimens to the event.
f.	  If the event features a rotation through a series of stations where the participants interact with samples, 
specimens or displays; no material may be removed from the binder, except for the 2026 National 
Rocks and Minerals List.
3.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 Emphasis will be placed upon task-oriented activities such as identification of rocks and minerals based 
on observations of properties and characteristics, interpretation of graphs and charts, and analyzing data.
b.	 Where possible, participants will move from station to station, with the length of time at each station 
predetermined and announced by the Event Supervisor. Participants may not return to stations but may 
change or add information to their original responses while at other stations.
c.	 Identification will be limited to specimens appearing on the Official Science Olympiad 2026 National 
Rocks and Minerals List, but other rocks or minerals may be used to illustrate key concepts. 
d.	 If identification of a specimen is not possible through observation, key characteristics/properties of the 
specimen will be provided.
e.	 Identification of rocks and minerals should be at least 30% but not more than 50% of available 
points.
f.	 Questions/tasks will be balanced between rock and mineral topics.
g.	 Written descriptions of how a specimen might react if tested with hydrochloric acid (HCl) may be 
given. However, HCl will not be used or provided. Participants will not be allowed to do a taste test.
h.	 Mineral Topics
i.	
Identification - specimens or images used should show observable properties. Where observable 
properties are insufficient to identify a specimen, other diagnostic characteristics will be provided
ii.	 Physical Properties - color, hardness, luster, streak, cleavage/fracture, density/specific gravity/ heft, 
diaphaneity, and tenacity
iii.	 Other properties - limited to reaction with acid, fluorescence, magnetism, smell, taste, double 
refraction, piezoelectricity, and radioactivity.
iv.	 Mineral habit - limited to acicular (needlelike), bladed, botryoidal, cubic, dendritic, dodecahedral, 
doubly terminated, druzy, geodic, hexagonal, hopper, massive, micaceous, octahedral, pisolitic, 
prismatic, radiating, rosette, stalactitic, twinning, and tabular
v.	
Chemical composition – chemical formulas, relationships between chemistry and properties (e.g., 
effect of trace elements on mineral color)
(1)	Solid solution series (e.g., feldspar ternary diagrams)
(2)	Phase diagram interpretation: temperature/pressure, temperature/ composition (limited to two 
component systems)
vi.	 Polymorphs (e.g., aragonite/calcite; diamond/graphite, orthoclase/microcline; sillimanite/
andalusite/kyanite)
vii.	 Classification - mineral families based on composition (see Rocks and Minerals List)
(1)	Mineral groups (e.g., feldspar, garnet, tourmaline) - similarities of chemical composition and 
shared properties
(2)	Silicate tetrahedra and their structures: isolated tetrahedra (nesosilicates), island (sorosilicates), 
chain (inosilicates), ring (cyclosilicates), sheet (phyllosilicates), and framework (tectosilicates)

©2026 - C59
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
ROCKS AND MINERALS C (CONT.)
(3)	State and National Only – Crystal Systems – cubic, tetragonal, orthorhombic, monoclinic, 
triclinic, trigonal, and hexagonal; emphasis on how crystalline structures result in certain 
physical properties (e.g., cleavage planes, crystal shape)
viii.	Methods of formation and environments (e.g., hydrothermal, chemical weathering, crystallization 
from magma, evaporites, chemical precipitation, alteration under heat & pressure)
ix.	 Minerals associated with rock-forming environments (e.g., evaporite minerals in sedimentary 
settings; mafic minerals in oceanic crust; minerals that form under metamorphic conditions)
x.	 Bowen’s Reaction Series – relationship between mineral crystallization and temperature in magma
xi.	 Uses of minerals 
(1)	Ores, industry, jewelry, geochronology, medicine, manufacturing, construction, 
electronics, etc.
(2)	Precious and semi-precious gemstone varieties from minerals on the 2026 Rocks and 
Minerals List as well as the following, limited to: emerald, aquamarine, morganite, peridot, 
ruby, sapphire, pearl and amber
i.	 Rock Topics
i.	
Identification - specimens or images used should show observable characteristics. Where observable 
characteristics are insufficient to identify a specimen, other diagnostic characteristics will be provided 
(e.g., mineral composition of fine-grained igneous rocks, reaction to acid of chalk or diatomite)
ii.	 Classification - igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic including observable diagnostic 
characteristics that facilitate classification (e.g., glassy or vesicular texture in igneous; rounded 
grains, fossils, or layers in sedimentary; and foliation or banding in metamorphic)
iii.	 Igneous Rocks:
(1)	Textures - including aphanitic (fine-grained), glassy, vesicular, porphyritic, pyroclastic, 
phaneritic (coarse-grained), and pegmatitic
(2)	Composition and essential minerals - felsic, intermediate, mafic, and ultramafic
(3)	Intrusive and extrusive environments and formations - limited to batholith, dike, sill, volcanic 
neck, lava flow, pyroclastic flow, and laccolith
(4)	Relationship between textures and environments of formation (e.g., intrusive/plutonic, 
extrusive/volcanic and relative rates of solidification.)
(5)	Types of igneous rocks and constituent minerals at various types of plate boundaries (e.g., 
basalt at mid-ocean ridge; andesite/diorite at subduction zones; granite at convergent 
boundaries)
iv.	 Sedimentary Rocks:
(1)	Textures - limited to clastic (detrital or terrigenous), chemical (crystalline), and biochemical 
(organic/bioclastic)
(2)	Composition and essential minerals
(3)	Grain sizes (e.g., clay, silt, sand, pebble, cobble, boulder), sorting, and shape (round vs 
angular) and their implications for energy and conditions of environments of deposition 
(e.g., fine grained-low energy; coarse-grained-high energy)
(4)	Relationship between textures and composition to environments of deposition
(5)	Environments of deposition - including, but not limited to alluvial fan, delta, river/stream 
(fluvial), lake (lacustrine), swamp, wind (aeolian), floodplain, beach, shallow marine/shelf, 
and deep marine
(6)	Primary sedimentary structures and their implications about depositional processes and 
environments (e.g., plane bedding, crossbedding, ripple marks, mud cracks, graded bedding, 
and fossil tracks & trails)
v.	
Metamorphic Rocks:
(1)	Textures - foliated (e.g., slaty cleavage, schistose, banding) and non-foliated
(2)	Mineral composition 
(3)	Metamorphic minerals that form in existing rocks due to heat and pressure (e.g., garnet, 
corundum, kyanite, staurolite, epidote, andalusite, sillimanite, chlorite)
(4)	Protoliths (parent rocks); e.g. shale for slate, limestone for marble, sandstone for quartzite.
(5)	Regional and contact metamorphism
(6)	Grade (intensity) of metamorphism (low, medium, high) and index minerals (e.g., 
chlorite, epidote, garnet, staurolite, kyanite, and sillimanite) that indicate the degree of 
metamorphism

©2026 - C60
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
(7)	Relationship of temperature, pressure, depth to types of metamorphism and metamorphic 
facies (hornfels, zeolite, greenschist, amphibolite, granulite, blueschist, and eclogite) based on 
interpretation of graphs and charts
(8)	Environments of metamorphism in the context of plate tectonics - regional metamorphism and 
mountain building at convergent continental-continental boundary; blueschist and eclogite 
formation in subduction zones; greenstone/greenschist formation from basalt or gabbro at 
ocean crust divergent boundaries
vi.	 Rock Cycle – emphasis on the geologic processes that form rocks (e.g., melting & solidification; 
uplift, erosion & deposition; burial, compaction & cementation; heat & pressure resulting in 
recrystallization & deformation)
vii.	 Economic importance and uses of rocks (e.g., building stone, ores, ornamental, agriculture, fossil 
fuels)
viii.	States and National Only - Thin Sections of Rocks; using photographs taken through a microscope 
(photomicrographs)
(1)	Identify minerals using their optical properties and features in polarized light (twinning, 
extinction, cleavage planes, birefringence); limited to microcline, plagioclase, calcite, augite, 
and garnet.
(2)	Distinguish rock types and characteristics of igneous, sedimentary, metamorphic rocks by their 
microscopic textures limited to:
(a)	Igneous - fine grained crystalline (holocrystalline), vesicular, glassy, porphyritic (e.g., basalt 
vs. pumice)
(b)	Sedimentary – rounded, angular, well sorted vs. poorly sorted, skeletal fragments (e.g., 
oolites, sandstone vs. arkose)
4.	 SCORING:
a.	 High score wins.
b.	 Point values of each question or section may be specified.
c.	 Preselected questions/sections will be used as tiebreakers.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
ROCKS AND MINERALS C (CONT.)

©2026 - C61
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
2026 NATIONAL ROCKS AND MINERALS LIST
SULFATES
Barite
Celestite
Gypsum4 varieties:
Alabaster (massive)
Satin Spar (fibrous)
Selenite (crystalline)
SULFIDES
Bornite*1
Chalcopyrite
Galena
Pyrite
Sphalerite
Stibnite*
SILICATES
Amphibole Group
Actinolite*
Hornblende
Tremolite*
Apophyllite*
Beryl
Chrysocolla*
Dioptase*
Epidote 
Feldspar Group
Plagioclase feldspars
Albite
Labradorite
Potassium feldspars
Amazonite
Orthoclase/Microcline2
Garnet Group
Almandine
Grossular (green)
BORATES
Ulexite
CARBONATES
Aragonite
Azurite
Calcite
Dolomite
Malachite
Magnesite*1
Rhodochrosite*
Siderite*
NATIVE ELEMENTS
Copper
Diamond
Gold
Graphite
Silver
Sulfur
HALIDES
Fluorite
Halite4
OXIDE/HYDROXIDES
Corundum
Goethite/Limonite
Hematite
Magnetite
Pyrolusite*
Rutile*
Zincite*
PHOSPHATES
Turquoise* 
Apatite Group
Fluorapatite
Pyromorphite*
Vanadinite*
SILICATES (cont)
Kaolinite
Kyanite
Mica Group
Biotite
Lepidolite*
Muscovite
Olivine
Prehnite*
Pyroxene Group
Augite
Rhodonite*
Spodumene*
Quartz varieties:
Aventurine
Agate/Chalcedony
Amethyst
Citrine
Jasper*
Milky Quartz
Opal
Rock Crystal
Rose Quartz
Smoky Quartz*
Tiger’s Eye*
Sodalite
Staurolite 
Stilbite*
Talc
Topaz
Tourmaline3
Willemite*
Wollastonite*
Zircon*
MINERALS

©2026 - C62
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
2026 NATIONAL ROCKS AND MINERALS LIST (CONT.)
*Specimens marked with an asterisk (*) are for State and National Tournaments
1.	 For identification purposes, information will be provided such as diagnostic properties, 
chemical formulas, grain size, or composition.
2.	 The pink/tan variety of feldspar should be identified as Orthoclase/Microcline or Potassium 
feldspar.
3.	 Although Tourmaline is the generic name for a group of related mineral species, for 
identification purposes, tourmaline will be accepted.
4.	 Bauxite has been reclassified as a sedimentary rock.
5.	 Rock Salt and Rock Gypsum for identification purposes are considered the same, respectively, 
as the minerals Halite and Gypsum and do not need to be distinguished
SEDIMENTARY
Banded Iron Formation
Bauxite4
Breccia
Chert/Flint
Conglomerate
Diatomite*1
Dolostone
Rock Salt (Halite)5
Rock Gypsum5
Shale
Siltstone*1
Coal varieties:
Anthracite
Bituminous
Lignite
Limestone varieties:
Chalk
Coquina
Fossil Limestone
Oolitic Limestone
Travertine
Sandstone varieties:
Arkose
Greywacke*
Quartz Sandstone
IGNEOUS
Andesite
Basalt
Diorite
Gabbro
Granite
Obsidian
Pegmatite
Peridotite
Pumice
Rhyolite
Scoria
Syenite*1
Tuff*1
Tuff Breccia*
METAMORPHIC
Amphibolite*
Gneiss
Marble
Phyllite
Quartzite
Schist Varieties:
Garnet Schist
Mica Schist
Talc Schist (Soapstone)*
Serpentinite*
Slate
ROCKS

©2026 - C63
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Participants will be assessed on their understanding and evaluation of freshwater 
aquatic environments.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2                      	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
EYE PROTECTION: C 	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class II
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS: 
a.	 Each team may bring writing utensils.
b.	 Each team may bring two Class II calculators.
c.	 Each team may bring one (1) 8.5” x 11” sheet of paper that may contain information on both sides in any 
form and from any source. The sheet of paper may be laminated or placed in a sheet protector to increase 
durability. Affixed labels, as well as multiple sheets of paper (whether in a single sheet protector or not) 
are prohibited.
d.	 Each team may bring one student built salinometer/hydrometer for testing.
e.	 Participants must wear eye protection during Salinometer Testing (3.Part IV). Teams without proper eye 
protection must be immediately informed and given a chance to obtain eye protection if time allows.
3.	 THE COMPETITION: This may include analysis, interpretation or use of charts, graphs and sample data. 
Supervisors are expected to utilize freshwater scenarios and have students analyze and evaluate comparative 
macroinvertebrates and water quality data. Process skills may include equipment use, collecting and 
interpreting data, measuring, analyzing data, and making inferences.
Part I: Freshwater Ecology – 30% of the total score
a.	 This section will use multiple choice, matching, fill-in-the-blank and/or short answer questions in areas 
such as: aquatic ecology, water cycle, nutrient cycling, aquatic chemistry and its implications for life, 
potable water treatment, waste water treatment, aquatic food chains/webs, community interactions, 
population dynamics, watershed resource management issues, sedimentation pollution, and harmful 
species. 
b.	 Understand and apply the concept of indigenous knowledge or traditional ecological knowledge 
(TEK) to given scenarios.
c.	 State and Nationals only: life history strategies (e.g.; age structure, survival curves, life tables, 
succession, R and K strategies).
Part II: Freshwater Macroinvertebrates – 30% of the total score
a.	 This section will require participants to identify (common name only) immature and adult 
macroinvertebrates and aquatic nuisance organisms listed below and to understand their importance as 
indicators of water and wetland quality. 
b.	 In addition, teams are expected to know the general ecology, life cycles, and feeding habits of all listed 
organisms:
Class 1 – 
Pollution 
Sensitive
Class 2 – 
Moderately 
Sensitive
Class 3 – 
Moderately 
Tolerant
Class 4 – 
Pollution Tolerant
Class 5 – 
Air Breathing
Mayfly
Aquatic Sowbug
Water Mite
Air Breathing Snail
Whirligig Beetle
Caddisfly
Damselfly
Midge
Deer/Horse Fly
Water Strider
Stonefly
Dragonfly
Blackfly
Tubifex
Mosquito
Dobsonfly
Scuds
Flatworm
Blood Midge
Giant Water Bug
Gilled Snails
Crane Fly
Leeches
Back Swimmer
Water Penny
Water Boatman
Riffle Beetle
Predacious Diving 
Beetle
Water Scorpion
Aquatic Nuisance Plants: Purple Loosestrife, Eurasian Water Milfoil, and Water Hyacinth
Aquatic Nuisance Animals: Zebra Mussel, Spiny Water Flea, Asian Tiger Mosquito, Asian Carp and 
Crayfish/Crawdads
WATER QUALITY C

©2026 - C64
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
Part III: Water Monitoring and Analysis- 30% of the total score
a.	 Participants should be able to understand and interpret data related to testing procedures and purposes for 
collecting data related to salinity, pH, phosphates, turbidity dissolved oxygen, temperature, nitrates, fecal 
coliform, total solids, biochemical oxygen demand and their relationship to one another.   
b.	 No physical laboratory tests will be performed on these topics by participants.
Part IV: Salinometer Testing – 10% of the total score
a.	 Teams must build, calibrate, bring and demonstrate a salinometer/hydrometer capable of measuring 
saltwater (most likely NaCl) concentrations between 1-10% (mass/volume). Students may build a simple 
electronic salinometer if they wish. No programmable devices or those that can communicate over wifi 
are allowed. No laptops, tablets, or other similar devices may be used in the competition.
b.	 There are no restrictions on size except that the team must build the device to operate within a standard 
400 – 600 mL beaker filled with at least 400 mL of the saltwater solution.
c.	 Teams will be expected to estimate the percent salinity measured by their device to the nearest tenth of a 
percent. Full credit will be given ±1% at Regionals and ±0.5% at State/Nationals. Calibration solutions 
may or may not be provided by the Event Supervisor.
4.	 SCORING:
a.	 High score wins.
i.	
Points will be assigned to the various questions and problems for Parts I, II and III. 
ii.	 Points for bringing a salinometer for testing will be 5% of the total score.
iii.	 Points for making an accurate salinity measurement per 3.PartIV.c will be 5% of the total score.
b.	 Selected questions may be used as tiebreakers.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
WATER QUALITY C (CONT.)

See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
©2026 - C65
Science Olympiad is continually in the process of researching, developing and evaluating new events. We are 
looking for events, activities and projects that engage students in all aspects of the scientific endeavor while 
presenting them with exciting and challenging problems to solve and content to master. In an effort to ensure 
our events meet those standards, we have established a process that moves an event from a creative concept 
through a series of pilots and trials, with the ultimate goal of making it into rotation as a current event.
For the 2025-2026 season, we are publishing a selection of Trial Events in the 2026 Rules Manual. The 
events presented here are not a comprehensive list of all the events under development. For a full list please 
visit: https://www.soinc.org/learn/trial-events. These particular events are being showcased here because of 
the topics they address, their approach to challenging Science Olympiad participants and their potential to 
become part of the competition in the next few seasons. Right now, they still need additional testing and trial. 
Besides being incorporated into this manual the rules for these events and additional resources are posted at  
https://www.soinc.org/learn/trial-events.
We have incorporated the rules for these Trial Events into the 2026 Rules Manual so that all teams, event 
supervisors, and tournaments have easy access to them. If conditions allow, we encourage State Chapters and 
Tournament hosts to run some of these Trial Events as they offer participants looking for an extra challenge 
the ability to compete against like-minded peers while contributing important information to prepare these 
events to become part of the competition in 2027 and beyond.
If a Tournament does choose to run one of the Trial Events published here, a Trial Event from the Trial Event 
page, or one of their own creation we would ask that you have both event participants and Event Supervisors 
complete the appropriate post-event evaluation. These evaluations can be found online at soinc.org on the 
Trial Event page. These brief surveys provide important information to help us fine tune events as well as 
make decisions about which events are worthy of being part of the Science Olympiad National Competition. 
TRIAL EVENT RULES EXPLANATION

©2026 - C66
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Participants will demonstrate their knowledge of plant life and general botany principles.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2 	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
	
	
	
CALCULATOR: Class II
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Each team may bring writing utensils.
b.	 Each team may bring two Class II calculators.
c.	 Each team may bring one (1) 8.5” x 11” sheet of paper that may contain information on both sides in any 
form and from any source. The sheet of paper may be laminated or placed in a sheet protector to increase 
durability. Affixed labels, as well as multiple sheets of paper (whether in a single sheet protector or not) 
are prohibited.
d.	 Event Supervisors will provide live/preserved specimens, pictures, tables, graphs of data, microscopes, 
slides, and any other required equipment for the event. If used, toxic/irritating plants or specimens in 
liquid (e.g., Algae, protists) must be in closed, non-breakable containers.
3.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 This event may be run as either a sit-down exam or a series of laboratory stations with questions.
b.	 Participants will be expected to master the structure of plant cells, roots, stems, leaves, spore forming 
bodies and flowers, aspects of plant growth and differentiation, and the transport and storage of gases, 
water, and nutrition throughout the plant body.
c.	 Participants should also have a broad knowledge of the major divisions between groups of plants (i.e., 
algae vs. multicellular plants, monocot vs. dicot, embryophytes vs. cryptogams, woody vs. herbaceous 
plants). 
d.	 In addition to the above listed topics, participants should know: 
i.	
The history of botany
ii.	 Basic plant genetics and reproduction
iii.	 Photosynthesis
iv.	 Differences between the major taxonomic groups of plants 
v.	
Paleo-botany and plant evolution
vi.	 The role of plants in global energy and nutrient cycles
vii.	 Use of plant materials by animals and humans
viii.	Competition in the plant community
ix.	 Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs)
x.	 Production of foodstuffs and plant products
xi.	 Plant diseases; including nutrient deficiencies and infections
e.	 For Division C Only, participants are expected to know:
i.	
Principles of horticulture and aquaculture
ii.	 Plant biochemistry
iii.	 The roles of plants in medicine and environmental management
iv.	 Importance of plant diversity
4.	 SAMPLE QUESTIONS/TASKS:
a.	 What leaf structure is being shown on this microscope slide?
b.	 Using the graph, identify the peak wavelength for chlorophyll absorbance.
c.	 Identify three key differences between flowering plants and ferns.
d.	 Which plants would be in the next wave of plant succession for the region shown? 
e.	 Describe the role plants play in the nitrogen cycle.
5.	 SCORING:
a.	 High Score wins.
b.	 Selected questions will be used to break ties.
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
BOTANY C

©2026 - C67
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
CODE CRAZE C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Participants will participate in three quiz and coding activities designed to assess their
knowledge of practice module material in four areas: programming concepts, AI, cryptography and Python.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Participants will use CodeHS.com on a computer to take quizzes and debug code.
b.	 Each participant must bring a laptop capable of running Google Chrome for the purposes of competing 
in the event unless specified by the Event Supervisor.
c.	 Each participant may bring a wired or wireless mouse and keyboard.
d.	 No resource materials, except those provided by the Event Supervisor, may be used. 
e.	 Unauthorized resources or copying code from sources outside of ones provided by the Event Supervisor 
or those from CodeHS.com will result in a disqualification.
f.	 Participants will be provided a URL to access the competition site at the start of the competition. 
3.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 Teams will use CodeHS.com and the created competition module to complete multiple activity types. 
Activity Types & Suggested Times
Activity Description 
Image
Gamified Quizzes
(15 minutes)
Participants will be provided 
questions in concert with 
other participants, and both 
the accuracy and time to 
result against competitors 
will be measured. 
Individual Quizzes
(20 minutes)
Participants will be provided 
multiple choice questions 
and coding snippets. Only 
the accuracy of the response 
will be measured. 
Individual Coding Assessments
(15 minutes)
Participants will be provided 
coding challenges to solve. 
The accuracy of the result 
will be measured by an auto 
grader or event volunteer.
i.	
For Regionals, teams will be required to show competence in 4 areas: programming concepts, AI, 
cryptography and Python
ii.	 For State and Nationals, teams will be assessed in the same areas, and potential other topic areas 
(e.g., quantum, data structures)
4.	 SCORING:
a.	 The high score wins with each section serving as one-third of a participant's total score. 
b.	 Ties will be resolved using the rankings determined in the Gamified Quiz section. 
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
This event is sponsored by CodeHS.

©2026 - C68
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Prior to the tournament, teams will design, build, and bring up to two bottle rockets to the 
tournament to launch a ping pong ball attached to a parachute to stay aloft for the greatest amount of time.
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 5 minutes
EYE PROTECTION: B
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	 Teams must provide up to two rockets, two unaltered standard ping pong balls, and two parachutes.
b.	 Parachutes must be attached to ping pong balls with tape only. The ping pong ball attached to the 
parachute assembly makes up the parachute payload system.
c.	 All participants must properly wear eye protection at all times. Participants without proper eye protection 
must be immediately informed and given a chance to obtain eye protection if time allows. Participants 
without eye protection will not compete.
d.	 Event Supervisors must provide a launcher (that uses a Schrader valve), an air pump, a pressure gauge, 
and timing devices. Teams may bring their own manual bicycle pump with a pressure gauge to use, but 
it must attach to the launcher provided by the Event Supervisor.
e.	 This event should be held inside with a high ceiling (greater than 20 feet recommended). Tournament 
directors must provide the ceiling height (in feet) to teams at least 1 month in advance. Extreme care 
must be taken to protect the floor and ceiling of any inside facilities used for practice and competition.
3.	 CONSTRUCTION PARAMETERS:
a.	 Rocket pressure vessels 
must be made from a 
single 1-liter or less plastic 
carbonated 
beverage 
bottle with a nozzle 
opening internal diameter 
of approximately 2.2 cm 
(a 
1/2-inch 
Schedule 
40 PVC pipe must fit 
tightly inside the nozzle 
opening) and a standard neck height from flange to bottle’s opening of under 1.6 cm. The bottle label 
must be presented.
b.	 The structural integrity of the pressure vessel must not be altered. This includes, but is not limited to: 
physical, thermal or chemical damage (e.g., cutting, sanding, using hot or super glues, spray painting).
c.	 The nose of the rocket must be rounded or blunt at the tip and designed such that when a standard bottle 
cap (~3.1 cm diameter x 1.25 cm tall) is placed on top of the nose, no portion of the nose touches the 
inside top of the bottle cap (see Figure 1).
d.	 Only tape must be used to attach fins and other components to the pressure vessel. No glues of any type 
may be used on the pressure vessel. Metal of any type is prohibited anywhere on the rocket or parachute 
payload system.
e.	 Fins and other parts added to the bottle must be 5 cm or higher above the level of the bottle’s opening, 
to ensure rockets fit on the launcher (see Figure 2).
f.	 All energy imparted to the rocket/parachute payload system must originate from air pressure provided by 
the Supervisor; no water. Gases other than air, explosives, liquids including water, chemical reactions, 
pyrotechnics, electrical devices, elastic powered flight assists, throwing devices, remote controls, and 
tethers are prohibited at any time.
g.	 At the National Tournament the launcher nipple will extend into the rocket 1.173 in +/- 0.02 in (3 cm 
+/- 0.5 cm) above the top side of the shoulder of the bottle (see Figure 3).
4.	 PRACTICE LOG:
a.	 During inspection, each team must present a flight log of recorded data for each rocket. Data must 
include 5 or more parameters (3 required and at least 2 additional) for 15 or more test flights prior to the 
competition for each rocket. The required parameters are: 1) pressure (psi), 2) estimated/recorded peak 
flight height (feet), 3) time aloft (seconds). The additional parameters are chosen by the team (examples 
include: # fins, parachute diameter, etc.)
b.	 Teams must use their data to justify their pressure choice. Rockets without a flight log or an incomplete 
log will NOT be launched.
PING PONG PARACHUTE C
No Fin
Zone 5 cm
Nose not 
touching
inside top 
of cap
Cross
section of 
bottle cap
Cross section of
rocket
Figure 3.
Top of nipple
Top of 
shoulder
3 cm

©2026 - C69
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
5.	 THE COMPETITION:
a.	 Teams must arrive at the competition site ready to launch with proper eye protection to have their 
rocket(s) inspected for safety.
b.	 Teams will have 5 minutes to make a total of two launches using the same rocket or two different rockets.
c.	 When called to launch, teams will load their rocket onto the launcher. Once the rocket is loaded, but 
NOT pressurized, teams will place the parachute payload system on or in the rocket. After the payload 
parachute system is loaded it cannot be manipulated. Teams will then pressurize the rocket to the pressure 
(psi) of choice based on their practice log data. The Event Supervisor will check the gauge on the pump 
to ensure the rocket is pressurized to the psi chosen and justified by the team’s data.
d.	 The Event Supervisor will make sure 3 timers are ready and then signal a team member to make a loud 
announcement of, “3, 2, 1, LAUNCH!” Then a team member will proceed to launch the rocket. After 
launching, the team will prepare for the next launch.
e.	 Timing begins when the rocket separates from the launcher and stops when the parachute payload system 
lands. The parachute payload system must separate from the rocket.
f.	 If the parachute payload system does not separate from a rocket, timing is from when the rocket separates 
from the launcher to when any part of the rocket touches the ground. This launch is placed in Tier 2.
g.	 If any part of a rocket or parachute payload system hits the ceiling or any part connected to the ceiling 
(e.g., a rafter, light, basketball hoop), then timing is stopped at the instant of contact. That launch is 
placed in Tier 3.
h.	 If a rocket fails to separate from the launcher because of a problem with the supplied launcher then the 
launch never occurs and the launch can be restarted.
i.	 All times for each launch MUST be recorded for breaking ties. Time aloft is recorded in hundredths of a 
second. The middle value is the officially recorded time.
j.	 Teams filing an appeal must leave their rocket(s), parachute payload system(s), and Practice Log(s) in 
the event area.
6.	 SCORING:
a.	 Ranking is determined by the greatest time aloft of a parachute payload system from a single launch 
within a tier.
b.	 Rockets and/or parachute payload systems violating 2.c., 3.a.-f. and/or 4.a.-b. will NOT be launched. 
Teams unable to make any launches will receive participation points only.
c.	 Ties will be broken by the best tier and/or greatest time aloft of the parachute payload system from each 
tied team’s other launch.
d.	 Tiers: The highest number tier will be applied when more than one is applicable:
i.	
Tier 1: A launch with no violations or problems
ii.	 Tier 2: A launch where the parachute payload system did not separate from the rocket
iii.	 Tier 3: A launch where the rocket or any part of the parachute payload system contacted the ceiling
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
PING PONG PARACHUTE C (CONT.)

©2026 - C70
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
1.	 DESCRIPTION: Participants will use computer visualization and online resources to construct a physical 
model of a de novo designed ideal protein structure. This year's event will focus on DI-II_10 as described in 
doi: 10.1038/nature1, paper freely available at https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3705962/
A TEAM OF UP TO: 2	
	
	
APPROXIMATE TIME: 50 minutes
	
IMPOUND: Yes
2.	 EVENT PARAMETERS:
a.	  Each participant must bring a writing utensil.
b.	 Each participant may bring one (1) 8.5” x 11” sheet of paper that may contain information on both sides 
in any form and from any source. The sheet of paper may be laminated or placed in a sheet protector to 
increase durability. Affixed labels, as well as multiple sheets of paper (whether in a single sheet protector 
or not) are prohibited.
c.	 Each team will impound a pre-built model of DI-II_10
d.	 Each team will bring one device (laptop, Chromebook, tablet, or phone) that can connect to WIFI with 
a browser that can run the JUDE Jmol program. Charging cord and wired/wireless mouse may also be 
used. 
e.	 Event Supervisors will provide written exams, WIFI information, and the website address for the 
molecular exploration portion of the event.
3.	 THE COMPETITION:
Part I: The Pre-Built Model
a.	 Participants will use the program JUDE (Jmol User Design Environment) to visualize residues 1 – 100 
of DI-II_10 based on data found in the 2LV8 file. The atomic coordinate data file can be accessed for 
free from the RCSB Protein Data Bank (www.rcsb.org). A constructed model of this protein must be 
brought to all competitions; as the competition level increases, the scoring rubrics for the pre-built model 
will reflect higher expectations for model accuracy, detail, and enhancements. (See SCORING for more 
details.) JUDE can be accessed at learn.3dmoleculardesigns.com/digital-modeling-hub/jude_online_
jmol for free.
b.	 The pre-built model must be based on the protein's alpha carbon backbone display, using a scale of 2 cm 
per amino acid. Students may manually fold their pre-built model using Modeling Ties or comparable 
bendable material (Mini-Toobers, Kwik Twists, 12-gauge dimensional house wire, etc.). The backbone 
should primarily be gray with a diameter of 0.75 – 1.25 cm.
c.	 Three-dimensional (3D) printed materials may NOT be used to build the protein backbone but may be 
used for functionally relevant features.
d.	 Participants will use materials of their choosing to add functionally relevant features to their model (e.g., 
selected amino acid sidechains, DNA, or associated molecules). These additions should highlight the 
significance of structure to the protein's function.
e.	 When an amino acid sidechain is displayed, its chemical property should be annotated on the alpha-
carbon of the backbone. For example, hydrophobic sidechains are yellow, hydrophilic white, acidic red, 
basic blue, and cysteine green.   
f.	 Participants must explain their functionally relevant features using clear and concise descriptions on a 
printed 4.25" x 5.5" paper, in the form of a table with 3 columns, headed:
i.	
What is displayed?
ii.	 How is it displayed?
iii.	 Why is it displayed?
g.	 All models, including all functionally relevant features, must fit within a 50.0 cm x 50.0 cm x 50.0 cm 
space.
h.	 The model must be sufficiently sturdy so that judges can remove it from any scaffolding or support, pick 
it up, and rotate it so that they can view it unobstructed from any angle and properly evaluate it.
i.	 Teams must deliver their pre-built model and Model Description Legend for impounding. They may pick 
up pre-built models after the competition.
Part II: Written Exam
a.	 Teams will complete a written exam to assess their protein structure and function knowledge and their 
ability to explore protein structures in the molecular visualization environment, JUDE. The exam will 
consist of multiple-choice and short-answer questions.
PROTEIN MODELING C

©2026 - C71
See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
C
b.	 Protein Structure topics addressed include:
i.	
The principles of chemistry drive protein folding and stability.
ii.	 The chemical properties of amino acid side chains and how their interactions stabilize protein 
structures.
iii.	 The basic design principles used to create the DI-II_10 protein.
iv.	 At State and National Tournaments, students will be asked questions about the current state of the 
field of de novo protein design.
c.	 Molecular Visualization topics addressed include:
i.	
Ability to identify different secondary structural elements of a protein and specific amino acids 
found in these structures.  
ii.	 Chemical environment around specific amino acid sidechains that stabilize structure
d.	 Participants may not visit websites outside of the JUDE environment.
4.	 SCORING:
a.	 High Score wins. The final score will be derived from all three parts of the competition:
b.	 The pre-built model (Part I) accounts for approximately 40% of the final score.
i.	
The pre-built score is based on the accuracy and scale of the secondary structures, the tertiary 
arrangement of these structures, and the relevant functional features added.
ii.	 Features that are irrelevant or do not explain the protein's structure/function relationship will not 
receive credit.
iii.	 The pre-built model's scoring rubric will change with each competition's level.
(1)	For Regional competitions, scoring will be based primarily on the accuracy of the 3D folded 
structure of the protein's alpha-carbon backbone (secondary and tertiary structures).
(2)	For State competitions, approximately 20% of the score awarded to the pre-built model will be 
based on functionally relevant features, such as the inclusion of key sidechains that have been 
added to the alpha-carbon backbone model to explain the protein's structure. 
(3)	For the National competition, approximately 30% of the score awarded to the pre-built model 
will be based on the inclusion of key sidechains that explain the interactions between specific 
amino acids that stabilize the protein’s structure.  
c.	 The written exam (Part II) accounts for approximately 60 % of the score.
d.	 Ties will be broken using identified questions from the written exam (Part II).
Recommended Resources: The Science Olympiad Store (store.soinc.org) carries a variety of resources to 
purchase; other resources are available on the Event Pages at soinc.org.
This event is sponsored by 3D Molecular Designs.
PROTEIN MODELING C (CONT.)

See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
©2026 - C72
DIV. C CHEMISTRY LAB EQUIPMENT LIST
Each team may bring any or all of the items listed below for use in Division C Chemistry Events. Teams 
not bringing these items will be at a disadvantage as Event Supervisors will not provide the listed lab 
equipment. A penalty of up to 10% may be given if a team brings prohibited lab equipment to the event.
Item
 Expected Use
Box 
 Containing all of the kit materials
Graduated Cylinders 
(10 - 100 mL) 
 Measuring volumes
Beakers (50 - 500 mL) 
 Doing reactions, developing chromatograms
Erlenmeyer Flasks (10 - 250 mL) 
 Doing reactions
Test Tubes 
 Mix Chemicals, heat chemicals
Test Tube Brush 
 Clean Test Tubes
Test Tube Holder 
 Holds test tubes for heating
Test Tube Rack 
 Hold Test Tubes
Spot Plates 
 For semi-micro scale reactions, testing solubility, pH
Petri Dishes 
 Doing reactions, developing chromatograms
Slides 
 To put hairs, crystals, or fibers on for use with a microscope
Cover Slips 
 To cover & prevent items from coming off slides
Droppers 
 Add small amounts of liquids to reactions
Spatulas or spoons 
 Getting small amounts of solids out of containers
Metal Tongs, Forceps, or Tweezers
 Holding & retrieving objects
Stirring Rods 
 Stirring mixtures
Thermometer 
 Determining the temperature of a solution
pH paper/meter 
 Test acidity or alkalinity of solution
Hand Lens 
 Magnification of small items for identification
Flame Loop
 For identification of ions in a compound
Filter Paper 
 Filter solids from liquids
Funnel 
 Hold Filter Paper
9V battery 
 Electrolysis
Alligator Clip Wires 
 Connecting meters to metals
Nail 
 Electrolysis
Piece of Cu metal 
 Electrolysis
Piece of Zn metal 
 Electrolysis
Multimeter 
 Measuring current, voltage, and resistivity
9V or less Battery Conductivity 
Tester 
 Determining ionic strength of solution
Calipers - mechanical, not digital
 Measuring lengths very precisely
Paper Towels 
 Cleaning
Pencil 
 Writing, Marking Chromatogram
Ruler 
 Measuring lengths
Magnets
 For extraction and identification of iron filings
Cobalt Blue Glass
 To filter out any sodium that might contaminate flame test from 
hands

See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
©2026 - C73
The following document was prepared to offer some guidance to teams as they select calculators for use in different 
Science Olympiad events. The calculator class listed in the event rules is the most complex calculator 
level allowed for the event.  It is acceptable to use a lower calculator class in the event (e.g., Class III 
calculator is allowed for the event students are therefor allowed to use a class I, class II or class III calculator). 
By no means are the calculators listed here inclusive of all possible calculators; instead they are offered as common
examples. The decisions of the event supervisors will be final.
Class I - Stand-alone non-graphing, non-programmable, non-scientific 4-function or 5-
function calculators are the most basic type of calculators and often look like the one shown to
the right. These calculators are limited to the four basic mathematics functions and sometimes 
square roots. These calculators can often be found at dollar stores.
Class II - Stand-alone non-programmable, non-graphing calculators look like the calculator 
to the right or simpler. There are hundreds of calculators in this category but some common 
examples include: CASIO FX-260, Sharp EL-501, and TI-30X.
Class III- Stand-alone, programmable, graphing calculators and stand-alone non-graphing, 
programmable calculators, often look like the calculator shown on the right. Some examples are: 
Casio 975 0/9850/9860, HP 40/50/PRIME, and TI 83/84/89/NSPIRE/VOYAGE. 
To identify a stand-alone non-graphing, programmable calculators  
Are look for the presence of the ‘EXE’ button, the ‘Prog’ button, or 
a ‘file’ button. Examples include but are not limited to: Casio Super 
 FXs, numerous older Casio models, and HP 35S. A calculator 
of this type with the buttons labeled is shown to the right.
Class IV - Calculator applications on multipurpose devices (e.g., laptop, phone, tablet, 
 watch) are not allowed unless expressly permitted in the event rule.
PROG Button 
EXE Button 
CALCULATOR CLASS DESCRIPTIONS

See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
©2026 - C74
This resource was created to help teams comply with the Science Olympiad Policy on Eye Protection 
adopted on July 29, 2015 and posted on the Science Olympiad Website (soinc.org).
Participant/Coach Responsibilities: Participants are responsible for providing their own protective 
eyewear. Science Olympiad is unable to determine the degree of hazard presented by equipment, materials 
and devices brought by the teams. Coaches must ensure the eye protection participants bring is adequate for 
the hazard. All protective eyewear must bear the manufacturer’s mark Z87. At a tournament, teams without 
adequate eye protection will be given a chance to obtain eye protection if their assigned time permits. If 
required by the event, participants will not be allowed to compete without adequate eye protection. This is 
non-negotiable.
Corresponding Standards: Protective eyewear used in Science Olympiad must be manufactured to meet 
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard applicable at its time of manufacture. The current 
standard is ANSI/ISEA Z87.1-2015. Competitors, coaches and event supervisors are not required to acquire 
a copy of the standard. The information in this document is sufficient to comply with current standards. 
Water is not a hazardous liquid and its use does not require protective eyewear unless it is under pressure or 
substances that create a hazard are added.
Compliant Eyewear Categories: If an event requires eye protection, the rules will identify one of these 
three categories. Compliance is simple as ABC:
CATEGORY A
•	
Description: Non-impact protection. They provide basic particle protection only
•	
Corresponding ANSI designation/required marking: Z87
•	
Examples: Safety glasses; Safety spectacles with side shields; and Particle protection goggles (these 
seal tightly to the face completely around the eyes and have direct vents around the sides, consisting 
of several small holes or a screen that can be seen through in a straight line)
CATEGORY B
•	
Description: Impact protection. They provide protection from a high inertia particle hazard (high 
mass or velocity)
•	
Corresponding ANSI designation/required marking: Z87+
•	
Example: High impact safety goggles
CATEGORY C
•	
Description: Indirect vent chemical/splash protection goggles. These seal tightly to the face 
completely around the eyes and have indirect vents constructed so that liquids do not have a direct 
path into the eye (or no vents at all). If you are able to see through the vent holes from one side to the 
other, they are NOT indirect vents
•	
Corresponding ANSI designation/required marking: Z87 (followed by D3 is the most modern 
designation but, it is not a requirement)
•	
Example: Indirect vent chemical/splash protection goggles
Examples of Non-Compliant Eyewear:
•	
Face shields/visors are secondary protective devices and are not approved in lieu of the primary eye 
protection devices below regardless of the type of vents they have.
•	
Prescription Glasses containing safety glass should not be confused with safety spectacles. “Safety 
glass” indicates the glass is made to minimize shattering when it breaks. Unless these glasses bear the 
Z87 mark they are not approved for use.
Notes:
1. A goggle that bears the Z87+ mark and is an indirect vent chemical/splash protection goggle will qualify for all three Categories 
A, B & C
2. VisorGogs do not seal completely to the face, but are acceptable as indirect vent chemical/splash protection goggles
EYE PROTECTION GUIDE

See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
©2026 - C75

See General Rules, Eye Protection & other Policies on www.soinc.org as they apply to every event.
©2026 - C76
NATIONAL TOURNAMENT SCHEDULE
2026 National Tournament Division C Schedule
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California Saturday, May 23, 2026
Event
7:00 – 8:00
8:00 - 9:00
9:10 – 10:10 10:20 – 11:20 12:00 – 1:00
1:10 – 2:10
2:20 – 3:20
7:30– 9:30
AM
AM
AM
AM
PM
PM
PM
PM
Anatomy & Physiology 
C
 
 
1-10
11-20
21-30
31-40
41-50
51-60
Closing 
Ceremony
Astronomy C
21-30
31-40
41-50
51-60
1-10
11-20
Boomilever C
Self-Schedule
Bungee Drop C
Impound
Self-Schedule
Chemistry Lab C
  
 
31-40
41-50
51-60
1-10
11-20
21-30
Circuit Lab C
41-50
51-60
1-10
11-20
21-30
31-40
Codebusters C
11-20
21-30
31-40
41-50
51-60
1-10
Designer Genes C
51-60
1-10
11-20
21-30
31-40
41-50
Disease Detectives C
11-20
21-30
31-40
41-50
51-60
1-10
Dynamic Planet C
41-50
51-60
1-10
11-20
21-30
31-40
Electric Vehicle C
Impound
Engineering CAD C
1-10
11-20
21-30
31-40
41-50
51-60
Entomology C
21-30
31-40
41-50
51-60
1-10
11-20
Experimental Design C
21-30
31-40
41-50
51-60
1-10
11-20
Forensics C
1-10
11-20
21-30
31-40
41-50
51-60
Helicopter C
Self-Schedule
Hovercraft C
Impound
Self-Schedule
Machines C
31-40
41-50
51-60
1-10
11-20
21-30
Materials Science C
51-60
1-10
11-20
21-30
31-40
41-50
Remote Sensing C
11-20
21-30
31-40
41-50
51-60
1-10
Robot Tour C
Impound
Self-Schedule
Rocks and Minerals C
51-60
1-10
11-20
21-30
31-40
41-50
Water Quality C
41-50
51-60
1-10
11-20
21-30
31-40

Science Olympiad
Two Trans Am Plaza Drive, Suite 310
Oakbrook Terrace, IL 60181
See the Science Olympiad website: www.soinc.org for current information regarding
Policies, Standards, Summer Workshops, Official Kits from Ward's Science and print
plus digital items in the Science Olympiad Store
Science Olympiad wishes to acknowledge the following business, government and education 
leaders for partnering with our organization. Working together, we can increase global 
competitiveness, improve science and technology literacy and prepare the STEM workforce of the 
future. Thanks to: University of Southern California (2026 National Tournament Host), 
University of Nebraska-Lincoln (2025 National Tournament Host), NASA's Universe of Learning 
Astrophysics STEM Learning and Literacy Network, Science Olympiad USA Foundation, Atwell 
Gives Foundation, Avantor Foundation, Ward’s Science, Cleveland-Cliffs Foundation, Combined 
Federal Campaign, Google, Illinois Quantum & Microelectronics Park: IQMP, P33, Ramboll, 
Aerospace Corporation, Amcor Cares Foundation, Cambridge Centre for International Research, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, CodeHS, Discovery Education 3M Young Scientist 
Challenge, Double Good Foundation, IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society (GRSS), 
InGenius Prep, National Free Flight Society, North American Association for Environmental 
Education, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Onshape, Prequel, SkyCiv, Texas 
Instruments, TKS World, University of Delaware, Investing in Communities, MDRT Foundation 
and Yale Young Global Scholars. Strategic Partners: 3D Molecular Designs, Japan Science and 
Technology Agency, mHUB, Midnight Science Club, MxD, NBC Universal Foundation, 
STEMConnector. 

